# Debt

By Riina Muzaffar

An estimated 70% of students graduate college with debt and only 37% are paying it off (Berman, 2016).  Why are so few paying back their loans?  To put it simply, the debt is too large for graduates’ incomes to bear.  The average 2016 graduate is said to have $37, 172 in student loan debt, excluding interest rates (Student Loan, 2017).  This amount becomes even more daunting when one realizes it will take 20, maybe 30, years to pay back - which entails an additional 20-30 years of interest (Lazzarato, _Governing by Debt_, 69). Considering many graduates struggle to find jobs, paying off student loans seems like it will take a lifetime, and that’s the point (Goodnight, 82)!  According to Maurizio Lazzarato, student debt exists for the same reasons as all debt: as a means to control the population (_Governing by Debt_, 69).  Debt is a tool used to ensure that citizens are liable to the state, in the present and future, so it is in the government’s best interest to keep individuals in a state of constant debt (Lazzarato, _Indebted Man_, 46).

Therefore, subjugation is a clear effect of debt, but additional effects have emerged that are unique to the neoliberal era: capital growth, income inequality, and transforming democracy.  To better understand debt and its effects, I will be analyzing it through the institution that I know perhaps too well: the university system.  However, this analysis of debt will not be conducted through an autobiographical lens.  To analyze debt and its consequences, I will be looking at Americans who are no doubt experiencing greater levels of student debt and consequently more pronounced effects. 
 
Therefore, the American university system will be analyzed in order to explore the effects of debt in a more concrete way.  Although, I will discuss debt in theological terms first, to convey that the subjugation effect of debt is a consequence of the concept, not neoliberalism and financialization.  Debt’s other effects - capital growth, income inequality, and transforming democracy - are a consequence of neoliberalism and will be discussed in relation to the American university system.  I will then discuss debt as an endless phenomenon outside of student debt before concluding with a summary of my points and offering some solutions to the problems I’ve posed.

## Debt- What is it?
When we think of “debt” we automatically think of it in monetary terms: debt as a sum of money owed.  However, debt can be conceived simply as something that is owed.  Maurizio Lazzarato defines debt as “a promise of payment” (Lazzarato, _Indebted Man_, 39).  Neoliberalism has conditioned us to view everything as capital.  However, I want to delay analyzing debt within a monetary framework for now because the effects of debt are not strictly financial.  The subjugation effect of debt is achieved and measured by monetary values, but the concept of subjugation is abstract; it is a consequence of feeling obliged.  Debt subjugates individuals, through guilt, that fuels obligation.  Utilizing guilt to make individuals subjects, via debt, was practiced long before capitalism (Lazzarato, _Indebted Man_, 78).

Financialization is how we understand debt, but it does not create the subjugation effect of debt.  Debt is subjugating in terms of its concept.  The concept has just been reapplied under neoliberalism (Lazzarato, Indebted Man, 79).  To understand the concept, and its subjugation effects, we need to look at it in theological terms.  Only then will it be beneficial to relate the concept of debt to the American university system.

## Debt in Theological Terms
The concept of debt has been around since the conception of sin.  Early Christian theology uses the language of debt to describe sin and forgiveness: salvation is only attained once one repays God for his sins (Phelps, 267).  This understanding of salvation as a repayment of debt, realized through sin, is criticized by Anselm.  Anselm’s satisfaction theory of atonement is based on the idea that human beings owe a debt to God and this debt is eternal.  For Anselm, sin is not a debt that needs to be repaid, but rather the act of obedience is the debt: “No one sins through paying it, and everyone who does not pay it, sins” (Phelps, 270).  By this understanding, one does not become indebted through committing sin, but rather one is inherently indebted to God (by original sin) and repays this debt through obedience.  This logic is derived from Adam and Eve’s original sin: “death entered the human race though a man’s disobedience, so life should be restored through a man’s obedience” (Phelps, 268).  Therefore, Anselm argues that obedience is the debt that we owe God and the means by which we repay God.  Similarly, under neoliberalism, debt is a sum of money we owe someone and the means by which we repay them. 

However, this theological debt is based on the idea that you will never stop paying this debt.  If you stop paying, and thus stop obeying, you have sinned and have been plunged further into debt; you have to repay that debt on top of the original debt.  In this way, sin/disobedience is treated as interest (Phelps, 270).  The failure to repay your sins, and your debt, is met with punishment in the form of “torment” (Phelps, 271).

The main issue of explaining debt in theological terms is that debt and repayment are not quantifiable like they are in monetary terms.  When one is plunged further into debt, what does that mean?  The act of obeying God seems uniform; the debt (obedience) is constant and the repayment (obeying) is constant.  If you now owe a greater debt from sin, but your only way to repay that debt is to consistently obey - how does that effect your overall debt to God?  Is obeying after sin enough to escape punishment?  How can you obey more to cover your debt and sins and escape punishment?

I find it incredibly difficult to imagine what it means to be more indebted when the means of payment and debt itself are valueless.  I think the frustration here is derived partially from the abstraction (inability to quantify), and partially from the inability to perceive what it means to be in a constant state of debt.  If to repay the debt is simply to avoid going deeper into debt, it seems hopeless and pointless.  In addition, the fact that nothing can be done to fully repay the debt, since the debt is essentially equivalent to the act of repaying (debt = obedience, obedience = repayment), it seems like you are doomed to be constantly indebted to God.
	 
The reason I chose to explain the concept of debt through theology, and specifically Anselm’s theory, was to evoke feelings of frustration regarding the concept of eternal debt and subjugation found in Christian theology.  I want to make it clear now that student debt is no different in this respect.  We may find it comparatively more conceivable because we have attached quantifiable values to both debt and the method of repayment: numerical value in dollars.  However, the numerical quantity of student debt only makes us _believe_ that this debt can be repaid and we can eventually be liberated.  However, liberation cannot be achieved- neoliberal debt is just as eternal and subjugating as the theological debt described.  I’ll explain this point further by looking at the American university system.

## Student Debt
Let me start with the basics.  Going to university in the States is expensive and for many students it is only possible by taking out a loan (Baum, 6).  This loan pays for the entirety of their higher education, but after graduation, this loan is expected to be paid back and with interest for every year this debt hasn’t been fully repaid.  Graduates are not expected to repay their debt all at once, but to consistently pay a fraction of the debt over an extended period of time.  Therefore, one is made to be accountable to the creditor for decades.  
	
Unlike the theological debt, the subjugation is indirect: repayment is not literally obedience.  However, by owing the creditor money over an extended period of time, obedience of the debtor is the result of the debtor-creditor relationship.  If a borrower fails to make a required payment in 270 days, they are said to be in “default”.  The default of a loan makes the repayment of the entire debt due all at once (Goodnight, 83).  If this amount is unable to be repaid, the government has means of collecting the money: wages are seized, tax refunds are collected, and even professional licenses are taken away.  The total amount that borrowers owe is then further increased because an additional collection fee is placed on the unpaid debt that can reach as high as 30% of what is owed (Baum, 36).  Therefore, by not consistently repaying your debt, you are being plunged further into debt.  
	
At this point, parallels can be made between student debt and Christian theological debt in terms of their subjugation and temporality.  Like one’s debt to God, student debt is seemingly infinite.  The inconsistency between rising tuition costs and average income shows us that student loans are made practically impossible to pay off: since 1982, family income has increased by 147%, while university fees have increased by 439% (Goodnight, 81).  This unmatched rate of inflation between tuition and income makes it very difficult for student debts to be repaid.  In this way, student debts are being paid off forever.   
	
Therefore, subjugation is also forever.  By attempting to pay off your student debt, you are subjugated by banks, the government, or by whoever the debt is owed.  Monthly payments function as a form of obedience, and the refusal to “obey” is met with punishment.  In Christianity, refusal to obey is met with forced subjugation with God forcing submission through torment (Phelps, 271).  Under neoliberalism, the government forces you into submission by inflicting theoretical torment - they take away your money, a means to pleasure and self-preservation.  Therefore, even if debtors disobey, and thus liberate themselves from subjugation, creditors correct this situation by forcing them back into a position of subjectivity through punishment.

## Neoliberalism’s Effect on Student Debt
So far, I have shown that debt, whether theological or neoliberal, has the effect of subjugation.  However, how debt functions in a neoliberal context differs in terms of its secondary effects: capital growth, income inequality, and transforming democracy.  These effects are the consequences of neoliberal rationality: making decisions in order to increase competitiveness and ultimately achieve capital growth (Bockman, 14).  
	
The American university system is consequently a new beast as a result of neoliberal rationality.  Wendy Brown explains that the American university system used to be an institution that promoted values of equality and democracy in the “golden age” of public higher education which she puts as the 1960s (Brown, 180).  At this time, universities provided a liberal arts education that had no concern other than educating the populace in material that “was necessary for free men to know and engage in the world sufficiently to exercise that freedom” (Brown, 184).  In other words, governments subsidized universities to provide a liberal arts education to “the many”, so that a sufficient understanding of the world was not limited to the elite.  It was ensured that everyone was given the tools to be analytical and participate as knowledgeable citizens in a democratic society.  In this way, a secondary education for the many was not merely a way to achieve “class mobility”, a chance for everyone to be able to obtain a higher standard of living, but rather to produce an ideal version of democracy where all citizens have the skills to govern themselves and the desire to be politically inclined (Brown, 185).  
	
However, the goals of the American university system have since changed.  They have adopted neoliberal rationality and have thus changed their central aim to capital growth.  Universities have become “a business enterprise” - the price of higher education is far greater than its actual cost, and thus a profit is being obtained (Nica, 143).  No longer are universities made to provide inexpensive liberal arts education to the many, but are preoccupied with driving up prices so that capital growth, not democracy, is the result (Brown, 193).  However, neoliberal rationality does not only influence capital growth within the university system, it teaches students to do the same.  
	
Brown explains that the term _homo oeconomicus_ no longer applies to individuals of interest as described by Michel Foucault.  She explains that _homo oeconomicus_ is impacted by neoliberal rationality in that it is primarily concerned with the accumulation of capital, not the pursuit of individual interests (Brown, 83).  In this way, _homo oeconomicus_ has now been used as a synonym for “human capital”: individuals who make choices to “enhance their value and attract investors” like individual businesses (Brown, 33).  They pursue higher education as a means of self-investment: to look more attractive to employers (future investors) (Brown, 37).  
	
Student debt only reinforces this pursuit.  Graduating with thousands of dollars in debt influences students to seek jobs that are higher-paying in order to pay off these debts, and thus capital growth becomes less of an interest and more of a necessity.  Universities are kept at high prices to ensure that students will pursue certain degrees, like science, technology, engineering, and economics, that will yield high-paying jobs to make their investment in higher education worthwhile.  The higher the investment (cost of university), the greater the necessity to obtain a job that will pay off this investment.  These careers are not only high in-profit for the individual, but aid the capital growth of the national economy.  Therefore, university prices are kept high to encourage students to pursue careers that will ultimately aid the economy and the national accumulation of wealth (Goodnight, 87).

Technically, student debt can be solved “with an aggressive policy loan of forgiveness” where debtors are bailed out and creditors repaid by the government (Goodnight, 84).  However, the American government is unwilling to do that because student debt is not only a tool of subjugation, but an instrument to influence the population to pursue jobs that aid neoliberal ideals (capital growth).  Sandy Baum is an advocate of student loans, claiming that it helps more people than it hurts (5).  She essentially disagrees with Brown on its impact on democracy by stating that student loans _are_ a means of educating the many by providing access to higher-education for those financially incapable.  She claims that the debt horror stories we hear about are from the few who failed to get a degree that has “value in the labor market” (Baum, 6).  Baum’s observations are correct, but she fails to comment on the ethics behind letting “poor” human capital, who made poor investment choices, sink deeper into debt to provide incentive for incoming students to function “properly” in a neoliberal society by pursuing jobs that will aid the accumulation of national wealth.

## Debt Lives Beyond Student Debt
I have spent a great deal of time discussing the subjugation effect of being in debt, within Christian theology and under neoliberalism, but I have yet to discuss what happens if you pay off your debt.  I have been using student debt as a case study to describe debt under neoliberalism, but paying off student debt is not always eternal.  Some do pay off their student loans.  Does this mean these lucky individuals are free from subjugation?

The answer is no.  Once one debt is repaid another one takes its place.  What I had left out when explaining Anselm’s satisfaction theory of atonement is that this debt of obedience, derived from Adam and Eve’s sin, was repaid (in full) when Jesus Christ gave his life.  However, a new debt to God was realised: “a debt of gratitude”.  This meant individuals were still indebted to God, and thus still subjugated, but “the content of that indebtedness shifted” (Phelps, 275).  Similarly, once student debt is removed, another debt takes its place, such as credit card debt (Lazzarato, _Governing by Debt_, 71).  To have “good” credit one has to consistently spend money they don’t have and regularly repay this debt in small amounts.  In this regard, credit cards are a self-perpetuating debt that also aids neoliberal ideals: capital growth.  Credit cards promote consumption and consumption entails the spending of money which drives the economy (Lazzarato, _Governing by Debt_, 71).  Therefore, debt and its subjugating effect is eternal even if the specifics of the debt change.

## Conclusions and Solutions
I’ve shown that debt subjugates individuals within Christian theology and within neoliberalism through analysing student debt.  Student debt has also shown to create capital growth, the intentional effect of debt in the American neoliberal society.  However, student debt also creates income inequality and the transformation of democracy as unfortunate side-effects in the pursuit of capital growth.  Income inequality is inevitable as there are certain degrees that yield higher paying jobs.  Those who do not obtain these degrees are left with little means to pay off their student loans and consequently fall deeper into debt due to compiling interest.  In this way, social inequality goes hand-in-hand with income inequality as a result of debt under neoliberal ideals.  Democracy is not transformed per se, in terms of its structure, but it has inadvertently been influenced by the neglect of democratic ideals.  The American university system was once used to educate citizens to effectively participate in democracy, but with the focus shifting away from an affordable liberal arts education, this ideal is no longer realised and democracy has consequently been transformed.
	
I’ve said enough to put any student into a minor depression, but there are theorists who’ve proposed solutions, or rather, methods of resistance.  David Backer and Tyson Lewis propose the idea of “studying” rather than “learning”: saying that students should attend university with no intention of pursuing a capital-motivated career afterwards (333).  However, this method of resistance may transform you into another statistic sample of unsuccessful human capital, and ultimately leave you falling deeper into student debt.
	
Lazzarato proposes a simple solution: don’t pay (_Governing by Debt_, 90).  Like how atheists would say to the Christian “don’t obey” as the solution to being indebted to God, a neoliberal solution to debt would be to not pay.  It is difficult to see this as a viable option, considering the consequence of not paying is severe (default), but Lazzarato suggests that the only way to resist is to change what it means to not comply (_Governing by Debt,_ 90).  To not pay, one should no longer be seen as a “failure” of human capital, but a resistor.  I have to admit, I don’t know what this type of resistance means or what it will look like, but it is a reassuring sentiment nonetheless.

## Bibliography
Backer, David I., and Tyson E. Lewis. "The Studious University: A Marxist-Psychoanalytical Groundwork." Cultural Politcs 11.3 (2015): 329-44. Web.

Baum, Sandy. Student Debt: Rhetoric and Realities of Higher Education Financing. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016. Print.

Berman, Jillian. "Watch America's Student-Loan Debt Grow $2,726 Every Second." Market Watch. N.p., 30 Jan. 2016. Web. 28 Mar. 2017. <http://www.marketwatch.com/story/every-second-americans-get-buried-under-another-3055-in-student-loan-debt-2015-06-10.>.

Bockman, Johanna. "Neoliberalism." Contexts (2013): 14-15. JSTOR. Web.


Brown, Wendy. Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism's Stealth Revolution. New York: Zone, 2015. Print.

Goodnight, G. Thomas, David Hingstman, and Sandy Green. "The Student Debt Bubble: Neoliberalism, the University, and Income Inequality." Routledge: Taylor & Francis Group (2015): 75-100. Web.

Lazzarato, Maurizio. Governing by Debt. Trans. Joshua David Jordan. South Pasadena: Agence Litteraire Pierre Astier & Associés, 2015. Print. Semiotext(e) Intervention Ser.

Lazzarato, Maurizio. The Making of the Indebted Man: An Essay on the Neoliberal Condition. Trans. Joshua David Jordan. Los Angeles: Agence Litteraire Pierre Astier & Associés, 2012. Print. Semiotext(e) Intervention Ser.

Nica, Elvira. "The Corporate Restructuring of the University System." Economics, Management, and Financial Markets 9 (2014): 142-47. Web.

Phelps, Hollis. "Overcoming Redemption: Neoliberalism, Atonement, and the Logic of Debt." Political Theology (2016): 264-82. Web.

Student Loan Hero. "A Look at the Shocking Student Loan Debt Statistics for 2017." Student Loan Hero. N.p., 10 Mar. 2017. Web. 28 Mar. 2017. <https://studentloanhero.com/student-loan-debt-statistics/>.