## What is decentralization?

As defined by Alexander Galloway, “A decentralized network is a multiplication of the centralized network … In a decentralized network, instead of one hub there are many hubs, each with its own array of dependent nodes. While several hubs exist, each with its own domain, no single zenith point exercises control over all others” (Galloway 31). Put simply, a decentralized [[network|Networks]] is a way of connecting people, institutions, and organizations in a semi-hierarchical fashion. There is no single centre of control — instead there are multiple, linked, equally powerful centres that each control certain domains.

But to define a decentralized network is a task quite apart from defining “decentralization”, and these terms must be differentiated for a very important reason. The term “decentralization” refers to a process rather than a result. It refers to the redistribution of power in the transition from a single hub — or what has been called a centralized network (Galloway 30) — to multiple,  autonomous, smaller hubs. But it is important to remember that the process of decentralization does not produce an equality of power for the individuals within these networks. What’s more, the end of process of decentralization can also blur into the beginning of the process of distribution, where distribution produces equality by making all individuals into their own hubs (Galloway 34).

Naturally, then, the process of decentralization will result in a change in importance for the some of the nodes. While some nodes will become more important if they were previously lower in the hierarchies, some others nodes will necessarily become less important. Put this transition into context, and the potential friction involved becomes quite clear. Moreover, this process happens in an even larger context. When decentralization becomes the intermediate step in a much larger transition between centralization and distribution, there becomes a great struggle between the forces of gravity and entropy. Where the tendency towards centralization works to reinforce a hierarchy among individuals, the tendency towards distribution attempts to endlessly dismantle these hierarchies. It is in the negotiation and reconciliation of this struggle that theorists such as Michel Foucault and Gilles Deleuze are most interested.

## Where can we see evidence of decentralization in our lives?

It can be surprisingly difficult to classify our institutions and power structures as a particular type of network. For example, one might consider the United States or Canada judicial systems to be decentralized, since there are a number of judges that are able to rule independently on cases. Galloway, however, notes that these judicial systems are in fact centralized, since there are multiple levels of courts, and rulings can be overturned by judges higher up in the hierarchy (31). But the issue becomes even more complex when one imagines a Supreme Court without a Chief Justice. If the Supreme Court were to be made up entirely of equally-important judges, would it be fully centralized? If you considered the group of judges together, then yes, if you considered the each judge as an individual, then no. The answer would be subjective, and the way we would define each node would also define the structure and the process.

One straightforward example of a decentralized network comes in the form of the international airport hub design (Galloway 31). Rather than having a central airport through which all flights must be routed, the decentralized network system allows flexibility and convenience whilst still maintaining a sense of order in flight patterns (Galloway 32). It is easy to see why this decentralized system has come to be favoured. By giving passengers hundreds of hubs with which they can construct their own flight route, it expands the possibilities for where customers can travel. But by designating only certain airports for international travel, the network retains few enough options to ensure that all the flights offered retain sufficient demand.

Looking for evidence of decentralization as a process can be tricker, however. Galloway suggests that the telegraph system constituted a form of decentralization (27), and one can see why. The telegraph system offered an alternative to the government-controlled postal services such as Canada Post, which processes all mail through a centralized system. In order to visualize this, one can assume that the government parliamentary buildings form the single, central hub of network of the postal network. Even if not every piece of mail goes through this hub, each piece of mail has had permission to do so from that hub. That means that mail can be intercepted or stopped by governing officials before it reaches its destination. When packages are screened at the border for their contents, and duties are applied, it is because it has reached control of someone higher up in the governmental hierarchy.

Instead, the telegraph system worked more like the airport system, offering a set of smaller hubs, each no important than the other, that could send and receive information from each of the other hubs. Under the telegraph network, you wouldn’t need permission from Vancouver or New York to send a telegraph from Toronto to Montreal. If you consider how much similar systems have proliferated since the telegraph system, you can see that decentralization is really quite prevalent in our communities. As pointed out by Galloway, “decentralized networks are the most common diagram of the modern era.” (31). If this is true, there must surely be great importance in deciphering the control such decentralized networks have on our daily lives.
What are the effects of decentralization?

As you may expect, the repercussions of these networks are far much more interesting than their structure. As new media theorist Pit Schultz writes in the online journal Nettime, “it is important to see today that the underlying technologies, the *network* became a manifestation of an ideology itself. Decentralisation, or the rhizomatic swarm ideology is value free, useful for military, marketing, terrorism, activism and new forms of coercion. it is not equal to freedom, only in a mathematical sense. but it is quite important to once again take the radio apart even if you are unable to put it back together, to be able to speak about it and learn.” (Schultz) [sic]. Jargon aside, one can see his point very quickly: the network structure doesn’t just determine the way something can move. The network structure determines what forms of information and pieces of information are important to the network. Because of this, the network structure will greatly control the values and social rules that form the basis of a society’s dominant ideology.

Think not of airplanes travelling through networks, but of information, decisions, and permits. If all decisions go through a central hub, that hub may be overloaded with work, but it will have total control over the results. Think not only of a centralized monarchy system, but of central bureau agencies. Consider the ideological control that results from having a single approvals board or office that issues permits for various products. If a single board or department has complete approval over what films may be produced, who receives funding grants, or which brochures reach the hospital, that board has significant control over what people get to know and how they get to see it. And this selection can be both inferential or exploited, in different degrees. When approvals are made within a hierarchized network, the result will nearly always entail mandated censorship. When every decision must go through a single body, only those products that match a single set of ideological ideals will be retained and distributed through the network. Consider the Goebbels office in Nazi Germany, a government agencies which controlled the production, distribution, and exhibition of films in Germany and the USA around the time of World War II. It has been suggested that Goebbel’s propaganda, alongside the German newspapers and magazines of the time, constituted an alternate but crucial war front (Herf 52).

The importance of bureaus has not been ignored by Galloway, either, who theorized that bureaucracy was the dominant mode of resistance in a decentralized network (27). Officials in a non-elected bureaucracy still have power over the citizens of their domains, but the hierarchies among them can be unclear or non-existent. Resistance in a bureaucracy might appear as a conflict between departments that stalls progress, unable to be resolved because neither department has the authority to override the other. Or it might present itself as the disruption of one bureau in order to aid or hinder the work of another. But it would not entail a third party mediator who would go over the heads of these departments and make an overarching decision, because such a mediator couldn’t exist in this type of network. This means that the tactics in a decentralized network must be different than in any other network type.

Another effect of decentralization can be seen in the treatment of individuals within a society. Gilles Deleuze has associated decentralized networks with what Foucault termed the “societies of [[discipline]]”, which were present beginning in the eighteenth century and achieved prominence in the twentieth century (Deleuze 3). As Foucault writes, “discipline ‘makes’ individuals; it is the specific technique of a power that regards individuals both as objects and as instruments of its exercise” (170). The move to a decentralized and disciplinary society also almost certainly enabled a whole new kind of power tactic: [[surveillance]]. Foucault further writes, “the perpetual penalty that traverse all points and supervises every instant in the disciplinary institutions compares, differentiates, hierarchizes, homogenizes, excludes. In short, it normalizes” (Foucault 183). It is unnecessary to say that surveillance has had a huge impact on our daily lives today. We know that we are rarely (if ever) free from an observer — but it would be interesting to consider whether this observer’s power is modulated by network type.

The periodization of the disciplinary societies also shows the conflicting forces of decentralization. Deleuze states that following World War II, the “societies of discipline” were replaced by something else: the “societies of control” (4). Again, the society of discipline — and, by extension, decentralization — is not a final result. It is an intermediary between a total hierarchy and total distribution. This sort of linear, progressive narrative should surely be taken with a grain of salt, though, for network structures are not limited to centralized, decentralized, and distributed.

## What are the other alternatives to decentralization?

As mentioned previously, networks can be difficult to define and exemplify. Consider the panopticon, a centralized prison design theorized by Michel Foucault (Galloway 31). This design places a guard tower quite literally as the central hub of a prison, with the prisoners all subordinated to single cells. The actions of the prisoners can always be seen by the guards in the central tower (Foucault 200)— that is, all their actions move through the central hub.

There is also the distributed network, which has particular importance in our technological present. The distributed network refers to a structure comprised of all equal nodes, each connected to the other in a non-hierarchical fashion. The distributed network is an example of a network that has been decentralized to the point where all hierarchies have been removed and each node has attained complete autonomy and agency (Galloway 33). This autonomy has some fascinating implications for how resistance might work. If all nodes are of equal importance, and have equal access to each other, there is considerably more opportunity to induce chaos. But it also severely limits how much disruption can be done by one single node. If you want to disrupt the network, you will probably need to gain access to a huge number of nodes in the network. It is no surprise, then, that as theorized by Galloway, resistance in a distributed network occurs by hacking (160), which can use the power of multiple computers in order to disrupt service to other computers in the network.

Although philosophers such as Foucault and Deleuze focus mainly on the centralized systems, the decentralized systems, and the transitions between the two, it is important to remember that there are other network possibilities. If we imagine that networks are always in the form of geometric designs, perhaps we can imagine that we are missing some fairly obvious potential network structures. The centralized network appears as a web with a single central node (Galloway 31), like a line drawing of a sun with rays. A decentralized network complicates this by introducing other nodes to the web (Galloway 32). A distributed network takes the form of a rhizome, “a horizontal meshwork derived from botany [that] links many autonomous nodes together in a manner that is neither linear nor hierarchal” (Galloway 33). But thus far I have only described networks that are constructed as variations on a web structure. What about circles? Loops? Spirals? Arches? What about concentric circles? These possibilities may sound bizarre and unlikely, but does that mean they cannot exist. I would suggest that an interesting place to look for some of these designs is in play, and particularly in gaming. Games offer an opportunity for us to see, simulate, stimulate, and experiment with our daily lives, and perhaps they could be used as an analytical tool as well. 

It is also important to realize that networks don’t exist in isolation. The predominant mode of the Cold War was the Bilateral symmetrical design (Galloway 196), which refers not just to a single network, but to a relationship between two networks. As pointed out by Galloway and Thackerin their book Exploit: A Theory of Networks, the network systems in place have changed throughout particularly throughout the last century. They write, “the high modern mode of political conflict is characterized by symmetrical war (power centers fighting power centers, Soviet and American blocs and so on). Then, in postmodernity, the latter decades of the twentieth century, one witnesses the rise of asymmetrical conflict (networks fighting power centers). But after the postmodern mode of asymmetrical political conflict, and to bring the discussion up to the present day, we recognize in recent years the emergence of a new politics of symmetry. “What we are heading toward,” write Hardt and Negri, “is a state of war in which network forces of imperial order face network enemies on all sides.” (Galloway and Thacker 15).

As it turns out, _there is not only a distinct set of power relations within a network, but a distinct set of power relations between networks._

## Why does the network system matter?

We’ve already seen how the network system determines who retains power in a community and how that power operates. But it must be considered that it is not just power that is at stake — or not just power as we think of it. Networks don’t just control who lives or dies after committing a crime or who gets to write legislature. As Foucault has shown, power and knowledge are inseparable (27). Alongside distribution of power must come distribution of knowledge. This could mean a distribution of knowledge about the body (and [[sexuality|Sexuality]]), controlling who gets access to sexual education, and the type of sexual education that gets disseminated. It could mean a distribution of meaning itself, where the creation of multiple, replicated meanings appears like multiple nodes in a network (Galloway 23). It could also mean a distribution of knowledge about the distribution of knowledge itself by controlling exposure to certain epistemological ideas. In short, when network structures, interactions, and transformations are translated into our lives, it affects not only how we interact with others, but how we understand the world we live in.

## References

Deleuze, Gilles. “Postscript on the Societies of Control”. October, vol. 59, 1992, pp. 3-7.

Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: the birth of the prison. Vintage Books, 1995.

Galloway, Alexander. Protocol: how control exists after decentralization. MIT Press, 2004.

Galloway, Alexander R., and Thacker, Eugene. Exploit : A Theory of Networks. University of Minnesota Press, 2007.

Herf, Jeffrey. “The “Jewish War”: Goebbels and the Antisemetic Campaigns of the Nazi Propaganda Ministry”. Holocaust and Genocide Studies, vol. 19, 2005, pp. 51-80.

Schultz, Pit. “The Idea of Nettime.” Nettime, https://nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-0606/msg00135.html. Accessed 2 Apr 2017.