"Discipline" is a frequently used term in the work of Michel Foucault. It refers to many things: such as a historical period “the disciplinary societies”, a way to deal with criminality, certain types of institution, certain techniques for ordering behaviour, and more. Broadly and most fundamentally, "discipline" in Foucault’s work refers to a certain category or type of power. Disciplinary power is described as historically emerging around the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (Deleuze “Societies of Control” 3) This is also the period of the emergence of industrialization and capitalism. Disciplinary power can be understood as facilitating industrialization and capitalism while also being shaped by them. Disciplinary power functions through different power mechanisms that are characteristic of this period. In order to develop an understanding of what disciplinary power means we must have some idea of Foucault’s conception of power.

# What is power? 
Foucault’s understanding of power is different from the popular conception of some more powerful group exercising domination and violence over some weaker group. In “The Subject and Power”, Foucault describes power as “a set of actions on possible actions; it incites, it induces, it seduces, it makes easier or more difficult; it releases or contrives, makes more probable or less; in the extreme, it constrains or forbids absolutely” (341). Power functions in the multitude of relations between forces throughout society. Relations between forces are everywhere in society, they could include the relation between a student and teacher, a patient and doctor, even a doctor and their hospital, and so on. These force relations are unequal and, therefore, form states of power. But these force relations and their states of power are not stable, they are always shifting and changing (_History of Sexuality_ 92-93). Force relations often link together in chains that can form broader strategies of power. These strategies are not planned from above by some powerful group, such as the King or the bourgeoisie, rather they form from below in the different local force relations, their practices, and their effects. It is actually these particular manifestations of power that consolidate the authority of groups like the King or the bourgeoisie. The power in these force relations is exercised through techniques, institutions, and mechanisms. We should not think of power as being possessed by or acting on individuals, rather power is what actually forms the idea of individuality and produces individuals. Disciplinary power is particularly effective at producing individuals, this essay will later detail the processes whereby it does so. Power then does not act on these individuals but functions through them, through the specific forms of individuality that it has produced. Along with forming individuals, power also forms and structures our knowledge. The different techniques, institutions, and mechanisms of power determine what knowledge is possible for us to create. But at the same time power functions according to the knowledge and discourses we have created (“Society” 24-30). For further discussion of this see the last section of [[Decentralization]]. From this description power might seem like some uncontrollable random force that we are subjected to, however there are always intentions and objectives behind the functioning of power. Although there is no grand decision maker behind the broad strategies power takes, within all the force relations that make up these strategies there are always intentions and decisions from the individuals that power functions through (_History of Sexuality_ 95). This essay will later attempt to exemplify these ideas about power in case studies of the prison and psychiatry. 

Corresponding to this conception of power there must be a specific form of analysis of power. Foucault thinks that to analyze power you should not begin with its center or head (i.e. the King) and try to determine what its desires or strategies are. Instead you should begin with the extremities of power, where power really functions and has its effects. You should foremost analyze the different techniques, institutions, and mechanisms of power, the force relations that exist within these, and the effects that these mechanisms and relations have on individuals and the production of knowledge. There should be an ascending analysis of power, starting from these specific mechanisms and seeing how they come together and form more general mechanisms, strategies, and categories of power, such as the category of discipline (“Society” 28, 30). 

# What is discipline?
As we said earlier, discipline is a broad category of power which Foucault identifies. As Foucault has already done the ground work of analyzing the specific mechanisms and techniques that make it up, we can begin with some of discipline’s general features and effects. One of the major features of disciplinary power is that it takes the body as its object. It works to make the body “docile” so that it “may be subjected, used, transformed and improved” (_Discipline_ 136). Correspondingly, discipline develops a more precise knowledge of the body and its movements. Disciplinary power determines the very movements, gestures, attitudes, and rapidity of the body, and subjects them to detailed controls in space and time. Through this precise knowledge and control of the body discipline increases the forces of the body in terms of economic efficiency and utility, but diminishes the body’s forces in terms of politics, making the body subjected and obedient (_Discipline_ 137-138). One can think of how the factory worker’s movements are precisely determined in industrialization’s division of labour, making the worker’s labour more productive but also separating and isolating them from their fellow workers, thus diminishing the potential for workers to organize. Alongside this detailed knowledge and control of the body, discipline increases individualization. As discipline studies, watches, writes about bodies it individualizes them. Discipline distinguishes bodies from each other and compares them, thus it produces an individual knowledge of each body (_Discipline_ 192-193). The main reference that bodies are compared to is the norm. Discipline establishes certain behaviours, movements, and attitudes of the body as normal, and then identifies those individuals who do not correspond to the norm as objects of increased study, training, and control (_Discipline_ 178-179). 

Disciplinary power is composed of a number of mechanisms that Foucault analyzes from the different techniques and practices concerning the body that emerged during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The first of these mechanisms is _the art of distributions_. Discipline encloses bodies in spaces that are specific to the individuality they have been identified with, such as putting children in schools or confining those deemed mad in asylums. These enclosed spaces are further divided into partitioned cells for each individual body. Thus bodies are prevented from forming masses and are more easy to supervise, increasing the ability to know and control bodies (_Discipline_ 141-143). Individuals are arranged in these cellular spaces according to rank. Therefore, an individual’s place in the space is variable and can change as their rank changes, promoting normalization as the higher ranks are often those that correspond to the norm (_Discipline_ 145-146). 

The next mechanism Foucault describes is _the control of activity_. This mechanism entails a precise division of time. Bodies are directed to be in certain places at set times, such as arriving at school or the factory at a set time in the morning. Time is further divided for the very actions of a body. Actions are broken down into their elements, such as the positioning of a limb, its movement, its direction, and set to certain time constraints. For example, a group of soldiers’ steps are precisely counted and timed in unison as they march (_Discipline_ 151-152). The position of a body is also specified for its actions. Foucault provides the example of handwriting instructions that stress that a certain erect posture must be maintained (_Discipline_ 152). The body’s relation to the objects that it uses are also regulated, such as precise instructions within the military for the proper way to handle a rifle (_Discipline_ 153). Finally, the control of activity entails an increase in productive activity. More and more of a body’s time is directed to be engaged in activity. From all these techniques a new knowledge develops of the body as something that is trainable. At the same time these techniques were made possible by an increased knowledge about dividing time and the efficiency of movements. Thus we can see that different knowledges and mechanisms of power interact and produce each other (_Discipline_ 154-156).

The third mechanism described is _the organization of geneses_. This mechanisms is also concerned with time, but in a broader sense. Time is divided into progressive segments throughout an individual’s existence. Certain periods are specified for certain types of activity. These periods are usually associated with training or exercise. An body must master some exercise before going on the learn the next exercise. Or, for example, a student must pass a certain grade before they may proceed to the next one. There is an evolution of the body through these progressive segments towards the characterization of individuality that society demands of it, however this characterized individuality does not have a set limit and exercise carries on indefinitely (_Discipline_ 156-162). 

The fourth mechanism described is _the composition of forces_. Discipline demands that individuated bodies be organized into a machine that can have greater effects than these bodies working alone. So the individual body becomes an element that can be placed and moved within the greater machine. The organization of these bodies within a machine requires a precise system of command, wherein the bodies immediately react to a given signal (_Discipline_ 164-166). For example, in the division of labour within a factory bodies are organized along the production lines in order to manufacture commodities at an increased rate. They are often told when to start or stop working with simple signals such as a whistle or a bell.

The final three mechanisms described train docile bodies into individuals. The first of these is _hierarchal observation_. This mechanism coerces bodies by observing them. Knowing that you are being observed in your individuality compels you to act in certain ways corresponding to who is watching you. For example, when drivers see a police car ahead of them and face the prospect of being observed by the police they will often slow down to exactly the speed limit. This observation is actualized in a hierarchical network like a pyramid, so that you are being watched by someone who is your superior. But at the same time the supervisors are being by watched by those they supervise. Thus it is not the head of the hierarchal pyramid that produces the power of observation, it is the very network of observation that produces this power over all the individuals involved in it (_Discipline_ 170-177). 

The next mechanism is _normalizing judgement_. In the institutions of disciplinary power there are different minor punishments for deviating from correct behaviour (the norm). These punishments are administered not just for behaviours explicitly counter to the norm, but for behaviours that failed to live up to the norm. For example, a student might be punished for not correctly doing their work. These punishments are corrective of behaviour that is not the norm and therefore they often entail increased exercise and training (_Discipline_ 178-179). The punishment for the student who has not done their work might be too stay at school late doing more work in order to bring them to the level of the norm. This constant prospect of punishment compares, differentiates, and hierarchizes individuals with each other. It develops a new knowledge of individuals that uses the norm as a point of reference (_Discipline_ 178-183).

_The examination_ is a mechanism that combines _hierarchal observation_ and _normalizing judgement_. The examination is a “normalizing gaze” (_Discipline_ 185). It observes the qualities of individuals, and judges and compares them with other individuals. The examination documents the individual in writing, and thus subjects them to more permanent surveillance, knowledge, and control (_Discipline_ 185-189). An obvious example would be testing in schools. But even a doctor’s medical examination falls under this mechanism of power. A doctor observes their patient’s body in detail and identifies anything that does not match the criteria of a healthy, “normal” body. 

# Discipline in the prison

A very prominent example of a disciplinary institution, and the one which Foucault focuses the most on, is the prison. Many of the disciplinary mechanisms described above can be observed within the prison. According to Foucault, around the eighteenth century the treatment of criminals transformed from being about punishment to being about reformative imprisonment. The impetus of reform is closely tied to disciplinary power because it is concerned with training, controlling, and normalizing criminals. And in order to reform criminals, the prison must develop an individualizing knowledge that is less about the crime committed than about the delinquent themselves: “the potentiality of danger that lies hidden in an individual and which is manifested in his observed everyday conduct” (_Discipline_ 126). 

Corresponding to the mechanism of distributions, prisons are strictly enclosed spaces where individuals are distributed into literal cells. This prevents prisoners from forming masses, sharing their criminal ideas, or planning escape. The prisoner’s cell can change according to rank, for example some prisoners are subjected to solitary confinement without windows if they have misbehaved in the prison. The activity of prisoners is precisely controlled. There is a strict schedule for when to sleep, when to eat, when to work, when to wash. Prisons often have training or work programs that the prisoners are forced to attend. These programs control and train the prisoner’s body to perform certain tasks and work. Furthermore, some prisons provide the prisoners wages for their work, thus the prisoner’s attitudes are trained to accept working for wages as a way of life. There is pervasive surveillance within prisons from the guards. The actual architecture of most prisons facilitates this surveillance as the front of cells are composed of iron bars that allow the guards to always see the prisoner. Foucault discusses Jeremy Bentham’s theoretical architectural model for an ideal prison he calls the Panopticon. Foucault thinks this is the ultimate model of hierarchal surveillance (_Discipline_ 200-201). See more on the [[Panopticon]]. Normalizing judgement is possibly also one of the disciplinary mechanisms most essential to the attempts to reform criminals within the prison. There are frequent punishments within prisons for any slight deviance from the prescribed activities and behaviours. Failure to come out of your cell for role call or refusal to work are just a couple of the deviations from the norm that can lead to punishment. The norm the criminals are most compared to is the law abiding citizen. Their deviance from this norm is the very reason they are in prison. The prisoner’s plea for parole is the major examination in the prison. In this examination the prisoner is judged for their entire behaviour while they were in prison, they are judged for their individuality as a prisoner. What they are judged against is the law abiding citizen. The parole boards’ task as an hierarchical observer is to judge whether the criminal has sufficiently been reformed into a law abiding individual. 

Foucault identifies that the most important thing about the prisons, accompanying the control of the body and the transformation of behaviour, was “the development of a knowledge of the individuals” (_Discipline_ 126). Here we can see the connection between power and knowledge that was emphasized in our first discussion of power. The particular individuals confined in the prison are called delinquents. The different mechanisms of the prison, particularly those of hierarchical surveillance and normalizing judgement, facilitate a knowledge of the delinquent individuals within the prison. Foucault calls the prison “an apparatus of knowledge” (_Discipline_ 126). And at the same time it is the knowledge about the reformation of delinquent individuals that justifies the corrective measures of the prison, such as hierarchical surveillance and normalizing judgement. Knowledge of delinquents and power over delinquents are closely intertwined and simultaneously reinforce each other. 

# References 

Deleuze, Gilles. “Postscript on the Societies of Control”. _October_, Vol. 59, 1992, pp. 3-7. 

Foucault, Michel. _Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison_. Translated by Alan Sheridan, Vintage-Random House, 1995. 

—-. “Society Must Be Defended”. College de France, 14 January 1976, Paris.

—-. _The History of Sexuality, Volume 1: An Introduction_. Translated by Robert Hurley, Pantheon Books, 1978. 

—-. “The Subject and Power”. _Power_, edited by James D. Faubion, translated by Robert Hurely and others, The New Press, 2000, pp. 326-348. 
