The goal of this essay is twofold: on one hand, it seeks to serve the function of an analytical summary to Michel Foucault’s account of identity and articulate the ways in which various forms of identity predicate the processes of subjugation; on the other — it aims to bring into focus the issue of transition between the prior and existent forms of subjugation as a pivotal new research direction that, insofar, has been left unexplored by Foucault and his successors in the field of critical theory. 

In the opening part of my synthesis, I will introduce the Foucauldian notion of identity and briefly contrast it to the interpretations of self and subject put forth by his predecessors. In the second part of my work, I will explore the issue of abnormality in order to articulate the relationship between identity, _virtuality_, and _dispositif_ and locate the role of identity within the broader context of [subjectivity](https://github.com/kredati/control-encyclopedia/wiki/Subjectivity). Finally, I will suggest that the processes by which the virtualities introduced by the figures "abnormality" transition into the dominant social discourse present a drastically overlooked aspect of the Foucauldian theory that must be undertaken by the existing and emerging scholars of [power](https://github.com/kredati/control-encyclopedia/wiki/Power), as it presents a distinct case of resistance. 

In “Foucault, Subjectivity, and Technologies of the Self”, Mark Kelly elaborates on the Foucauldian interpretation of a subject as an ultimate intervention into the “identification of the self with consciousness” that dominated the French philosophic discourse prior to Foucault (510–511). According to Kelly, Foucault’s view on subjectivity as a phenomenon of power relations spelled out a monumental departure from the formerly unquestioned assumption that identity constitutes a paramount individual property somewhat synonymous with the concept of psyche: unlike his predecessors, from Kant to Sartre, Foucault emphasized identity as a product of subjugation by systems of power — as opposed to an entity that pre-exists the power discourse (512). In other words, Foucault interprets identity as a result of the subjects’ “strategic situation towards one another” (“Sex, Power, and the Politics of Identity”, 167) and engulfing networks of power. Perhaps the most clear illustration of this process can be found in Foucault’s elaboration on homosexual identity at the beginning of _History of Sexuality_. 

As Foucault points out, homosexuality did not exist as a category of identity prior to the advent of the term “homosexual” as means of subjecting the very fact of [sexuality](https://github.com/kredati/control-encyclopedia/wiki/Sexuality) to power discourse. While homosexual attraction and practice of gay sex undoubtably existed throughout the history of civilization, they were nonetheless conceptualized precisely as practices, as opposed to markers of identity, until the end of the eighteenth century. “The nineteenth century homosexual,” on the other hand, “became a personage” and “a type of life”, whom the emerging systems of power constructed under the insistence that “nothing that went into his total composition was unattested by his sexuality” (43). As a result, homosexuals were differentiated from other judiciary subjects — who remained organized and prosecuted according to their deeds — as subjects whose practices were reinterpreted as signifiers, metonymies, and raisons d’etre of their very selves (44) 

As such, homosexual identity presents a distinct case study of what Foucault referred to as dispositif — a “heterogenous ensemble consisting of discourses, institutions, architectural forms, regulatory decisions, administrative measures, scientific statements, philosophical and philanthropic propositions” that inform the subject’s position in relationship to the networks of power and maintain the exercise of such power in any given social body (_Power/Knowledge_, 196).

It is crucial that homosexuality, as a category of identity, was defined precisely “against” the image of sexuality “proper”. And yet, Foucault stresses that the establishment of non-heterosexual identity did not aim at suppressing homosexuality, but rather sought to shape it into a distinct subject of power by giving it “an analytical, visible, and permanent reality”. As Foucault points out, homosexual identity was “implanted in bodies, slipped in beneath modes of conduct, made into a principle of classification and intelligibility, established a raison d’être and a natural order of disorder” (_History of Sexuality_, 44). “The strategy behind this dissemination,” according to him, was to “incorporate” the discourse of sexuality into the individuals themselves (_History of Sexuality_, 44) and thus spell out new pathways towards the enhanced exercise of power upon them. Simply put, it was by categorizing homosexuals as a group distinct from “[normative](https://github.com/kredati/control-encyclopedia/wiki/Norm)” subjects that the systems of power strengthened their control over such individuals. 

Negotiated as a pathology, homosexuality - as a category of identity - entered the sphere of institutionalized medical power, therefore multiplying the possibilities of control exercised over each individual subject identified as a homosexual. At the same time homosexual “diversion” from what the engulfing networks of power conceived of as the “proper sexual identity” implied that homosexuality itself became the figure against which the “proper” subjects were meant to identify themselves. In other words, since the “acceptable” and “unacceptable” identities were both defined against the image of one another — both ultimately became the techniques of power, as they predicated the behaviours of their opposites. Thus, homosexual and heterosexual subjects formed distinctly new power relations in a sense that they entered strategic positions towards one another, while at the same time introducing new ways in which the surrounding forms of institutional power exercised control over both of them. As a consequence, Foucault concludes that the very history of subjectivity “was begun by studying the social divisions, brought about in the name of madness, illness and delinquency” (“Subjectivity and Truth, 88). It is crucial that this process illustrates not only the power relations amongst individuals actors, but rather the very foundation of power itself. As Foucault points out, “individual subjects are never the inert or consenting targets of power; they are always its relays”, since power “passes through individuals” and is not simply applied onto them (“Society Must Be Defended”, 29). 

If the power relations between the “proper” and “improper” subjects illustrate dispositif, the relationship between the non-antipodean identities presents a far different aspect of subjectivity, a phenomenon that Foucault coins as virtuality. Virtualities, as Foucault articulates them in “Friendship as a way of Life”, can be broadly defined as the potentialities of relationships between subjects that are removed from the institutionally prescribed ways of being. Homosexual identity, in the form that it took the end of twentieth century, presents a distinct example of this process. As Foucault argues, homophobia itself does not constitute a fear of homosexuality as practice, but rather the fear of change that homosexual relationships can bring into the social structures that are, to a significant degree, organized according to the principle of a monogamous, heterosexual union: 
>“To imagine a sexual act that doesn’t conform to law or nature is not what disturbs people. But when certain individuals are beginning to love one another — there’s the problem. The institution is caught in a contradiction: affective intensities traverse it, which at one and the same time keep to going and shake it up.” 
(“Friendship as a way of Life”, 137)  

Thus, identities that produce new virtualities at the same time create new strategic relations through which power circulates and must ultimately adjust itself to respond to. Such virtualities by extension, adopt the function of resistance to the former techniques of power and subjectivity. Foucault explains this phenomenon in his reading of S&M.

In "Sex, Power, and the Politics of Identity", Foucault articulates S&M as a subculture in its own right precisely because it creates identities by reinventing its subjects’ position to one another through an altered approach to [pleasure](https://github.com/kredati/control-encyclopedia/wiki/Pleasure) (169). He defines the practice of S&M as the use of strategic relationships as the source of pleasure (170). Since power itself is a strategic relationship, the participants of S&M reroute it by means of a new virtuality. The new forms of subjugation that emerge in this process are markedly different from those predicated by “traditional” forms of social power. Whilst the latter is characterized by its subjects’ limited mobility within the power relations and the “strongholds” that are extremely difficult to suppress “because they have been institutionalized”, the new forms of subjugation manifest as an inherently fluid and interchangeable structure (169). In other words, it is precisely because the subjects of pleasure in S&M are interchangeable in their exercise of dominance over one another that they subvert the surrounding discourse of power through the advent of a new form of subjectivity. Thus, the virtuality presented in the form of S&M and identities that it creates ultimately represents the case of resistance to existing strategic relations. 

Foucault warns his readers that the future of such virtualities is not always clear. For instance, “to be gay”, for him, “is to try to define and develop a way of life” (“Friendship as a Way of Life”, 138). That is to say, “to open the affective and relational virtualities” (138) rendered invisible under the “traditional” systems of social power. And yet, he hesitates to articulate the nature of social institutions that could arise in the process of solidifying homosexual virtualities (“Sex, Power, and the Politics of Identity”, 172).

Similarly, it is pivotal to note that the very existence of a virtuality that falls outside the dominant discourse of power does not exclude the possibility that the identities formed through such a virtuality will develop into new means of domination. Foucault argues that ultimately any virtuality as a “ground” that “has been gained” will almost invariable develop into a tactic of control (“Sex, Power, and the Politics of Identity”, 167). The amalgamation of identity politics into popular culture presents a particularly interesting case study of this process. For instance, the rise of the feminist protagonist in contemporary Hollywood cinema seemingly responds to the solidification of the female homosocial virtuality into the broader social discourse. Nonetheless, as the recent critiques point out, the focalization of female identity around what the popular cultural imaginations paint as the “biologically female” — that is, binary — body presents a brand new form of subjugation, as it constructs non-binary and trans bodies as an “abnormality” in their strategic relationship to female identity.

At this point, it is critical to acknowledge that the issues of power and resistance, for Foucault, are mutually embedded. As he points out, “if there was no resistance, there would be no power relations” (“Sex, Power, and the Politics of Identity”, 167), and thus —no identity, which by extension means there would be no virtualities. Resistance itself, according to Foucault, “remains superior to the forces of the process”, as “power relations are obliged to change with resistance” (“Sex, Power, and the Politics of Identity”, 167). In fact, resistance is a part of a strategic relationship that constitutes power itself, since it necessarily “relies upon the situation against which it struggles” (168). Foucault explains this phenomenon through the analysis of lesbian culture — which, according to him, fostered its own forms of identity and virtualities precisely because it was segregated from the male homosocial structures long enough to articulate its own emotional and social experiences outside of the traditional modes of political power (168). Thus, the very process of subjugation and identification “against” the image of a “proper” subject almost invariably introduces the possibility of a brand new virtuality. This notion is pivotal, as it implies that dispositif and virtuality are ultimately interchangeable in their historical progression. The transition between Foucault’s account of the nineteenth century homosexual as a subject of medical power to the legalization of gay marriage across Canada — and, more recently, the adoption of non-binary governmental IDs by the province of Ontario — illustrates a distinct example of such interchangeability, as the previously “differentiated” identities in both cases re-enter the position of “normal” subjects in their strategic relationship to power. 

It is paramount that the interchangeability of strategic relations at the same time illuminates the aspects of subjectivity traditionally overlooked by scholars of critical theory. In so far, the successors of Foucault concentrated their efforts on the interpretations of his work in two principal ways. The first one prioritized Foucault’s role as an historian, thus localizing his work as an account of power relations pertinent to each respective historical timeframe. The second, positioned his work in the realm of critical theory, focalizing its value as a methodological framework for analyzing power relations at large. A critical aspect that, for the most part, remains absent from both approaches is precisely the issue of transition. While Foucault’s work did inform monumental changes in the academic treatment of identity and subjectivity, it is yet to be properly understood in regard to the processes by which the identities interpreted as “abnormal” — and thus subjected to the most oppressive forms of social control — can reshape their strategic relationship to power and “normalize” their virtualities within the broader social discourse. This question presents a pivotal research direction for the existing and emerging scholars of Foucault across a variety of disciplines from postcolonial theory to [queer](https://github.com/kredati/control-encyclopedia/wiki/Queer) studies. 

### Works Cited: 

Foucault, Michel, Paul Rabinow, Robert Hurley, and James D. Faubion. “Friendship as a Way of Life.” _Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth._ London: Penguin, n.d. 135-141. Print.

Foucault, Michel. _Power/Knowledge._ New York: Pantheon Books, 1972. Print.

Foucault, Michel, Paul Rabinow, Robert Hurley, and James D. Faubion. “Sex, Power, and the Politics of Identity." _Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth._ London: Penguin, n.d. 163-74. Print.

Foucault, Michel, Paul Rabinow, Robert Hurley, and James D. Faubion. “Society Must Be Defended.” _Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth._ London: Penguin, n.d. 59-67. Print.

Foucault, Michel, Paul Rabinow, Robert Hurley, and James D. Faubion. “Subjectivity and Truth.” _Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth._ London: Penguin, n.d. 87-92. Print.

Foucault, Michel. _The History of Sexuality Volume One._ Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1992. Print.
