## What is intimacy?
	
        To many people, intimacy is sex. To be specific, people associate it with the, “making love,” kind of sex. I was not immune to this precondition when I undertook this project, but I did change my view of the word quite drastically. There are many definitions that are considered reasonable, and the definitions that I am working with are selected from authors who helped me understand what I had always supposed was true of intimacy, and in some cases broadened my understanding of its use. This is not to say that there are not other considerations that could come into play, but my selection of these texts is both to simplify and complicate.
	Christopher Lauer introduces an Oxford English Dictionary definition of intimacy which says the intimate is, “that which relates to, or is indicative of, one’s deepest nature, that which is very personal or private,”(4). This definition gives us the thought that intimate is personal, singular, and divisive. I say this because for the intimate to be indicative of one’s deepest nature, and be very personal, it must follow that the intimate be capable of differentiating between different people. Given this, this definition becomes interesting when in dialogue with the ideas provided by Lauren Berlant. Berlant situates intimacy at its core as being a form of connection when she says, “To intimate is to communicate with the sparest of signs and gestures, and at its root intimacy has the quality of eloquence and brevity,” (Intimacy 1). From this we can gather that intimacy involves at least two people, to achieve the character of communication she discusses. This is even more articulated when she argues, “Intimacy also involves an aspiration for a narrative about something shared, a story about both oneself and others that will turn out in a particular way,” (Berlant Intimacy 1). Both of these definitions are plausible, but the question becomes whether or not they are compatible. 
How is it that intimacy can be both the quality of that which is in our deepest nature, and extremely personal, as well as the character of a shared connection in a relationship with someone else? Christopher Lauer articulates that, “What intimacy wants is contradictory,” (4). To help with this question, Berlant examines the difference between the view of intimacy in 18th Century Europe, which illuminates each of these ideas, and leads us to conclude that it is perhaps impossible for intimacy to prioritize both ends. In 18th Century Europe, Habermas writes that the intimate is a private individual space to negotiate what makes you unique (Berlant Queen 5). This is to say that the intimate is your sense of self that is created and formed in private, and which only after this has occurred, becomes outward facing. Berlant argues that the modern US, or the US at the turn of the century, has forgotten the domestic, privateness that was associated with the intimate in 18th Century Europe, and is rather in its end, entirely outward facing valuing acts for the public good and recognition (Berlant Queen 5). Given this, it is important to decide whether or not we think Berlant is right, and what mechanisms institutions of power have used to perhaps coopt and reconstruct the meaning and significance of the intimate.
 
## How does subjectivity relate to intimacy?

	Foucault theorizes that the subject is a form and not a substance. This form he says, “constitutes itself in different forms at different times, through the use of varied practices, but always by distinguishing itself from the physical body that engages in those practices,”(Kelly 513). This is to say that the ways in which an individual is made a subject constitute subjectivity, and that these ways can change, thus changing the constitution of the subject itself. Importantly, Foucault does not believe that the subject simply is constituted. He theorizes that the subject actively participates in it’s own constitution, thus making the subject self-constitutive (Kelly 514). The mechanisms by which the subject constitutes itself are referred to as technologies or techniques of the self (Kelly 517). This term may be deceptive because Foucault does not argue that the individual comes up with these techniques on their own, or even that they necessarily freely pursue them. Foucault says that they are, “not something invented by the individual himself. They are models that he finds in his culture and are proposed, suggested, and imposed upon him by his culture, his society, and his social group,”(Kelly 517). So then, the question becomes how is intimacy coopted by cultures, societies, and social groups in such a way that it is situated within techniques of constituting the self that can be suggested or imposed on an individual? I will argue that intimacy has been coopted by institutions of power to convince us that we must outwardly face our intimacy to constitute the kind of subject we want to be. I will secondarily argue that this coopting of intimacy happens in an even more perverse way, without even the semblance of consent. 

## How does the presence of intimacy in the public sphere influence subjectivity?

	For this section, it is important to have a basic understanding of exactly what Foucault means by, “techniques of the self,” which Foucault argues is the mechanism by which we influence our own subjectivity. Foucault writes, “technologies of the self, which permit individuals to effect by their own means, or with the help of others, a certain number of operations on their own bodies and souls, thoughts, conduct, and way of being, so as to transform themselves in order to attain a certain state of happiness, purity, wisdom, perfection, or immortality.”(Foucault 4). To this end, Berlant writes, “the inwardness of the intimate is met by a corresponding publicness. People consent to trust their desire for “a life” to institutions of intimacy; and it is hoped that the relations formed within those frames will turn out beautifully, lasting over the long duration, perhaps across generations,”(Berlant Intimacy1). There is much to be unpacked in this statement. Firstly, the consent she speaks of is not absolute insofar as the techniques of self used to create the circumstances by which we want to engage in the public are much more likely imposed on the individual than it is suggested. Even if it is a suggestion, it is much more likely than not that the subject who engages in the affirmative of that particular question be doing so due to promises of “a life” like Berlant says. Secondly, the “life” she speaks about and indeed she puts in quotations is an illusion as well, not immediately making clear what it truly can offer in opposition to defiance. 
	An example of an institution of intimacy is the modern realization of marriage. If we believe that the intimate is a shared connection on the deepest and most personal level, marriage is the corresponding publicness that Berlant appeals to. Achieving the true nature of intimacy and closeness does not appear to be enough in a society with an intimate public sphere, such as the modern United States. Thus, marriage is created to validate and make important the ways in which the subject has constituted itself as an intimate citizen. The term intimate institution is deceptive however because it calls upon a closeness that the very nature of its realization forces to be absent. Marriage itself does not necessitate intimacy, but it becomes a technique of the self that we unfairly use as a proxy. 
	Thus, the subject, as it is constituting itself, is consistently exposed to institutions of power that coopt the desires and relationships that it has with itself and others. This subjectivity allows for control on behalf of these institutions. For example, entering into a marriage does not simply behold yourself to the person who you’re marrying. It is similarly a contract with the state whereby in the event of a divorce, or a failure of the ‘intimacy’ they say they are protecting; you have agreed to engage in the modern judiciary to make good your individual experience. The state therefore owns marriage and convinces you that it owns intimacy, such that the intimate is coopted by institutions of power with the subject’s supposed, “consent.”
	Importantly, this only explicitly speaks to subjectivity influencing intimacy as it relates to state-level institutional policy. For relationships that fall outside of the legislative agenda, their intimacy is not free from scrutiny and thus is not free from the impositions mentioned earlier. For someone who exists in a polyandrous relationship, their existence outside of, or parallel to, the law is what justifies its greater surveillance by the state and thus the erosion of intimacy. For relationships that exist within the law, but perhaps without the public marking of a relationship like marriage, social surveillance still prevails. This is to say that for the co-parents who take their child to school, the registration form will indicate two last names of unmarried persons, or when other parents make the mistake of thinking they are married, they will need to be corrected. This is ultimately to say that there are ways in which we are forced to legitimize our choices through public portrayals of intimacy, and there are ways in which the state takes claim of this information on its own, which will be explored in the next section dealing with surveillance.

## How do institutions of power coopt the intimate explicitly without consent?

	As much as there are institutions that coerce the participation of the subject, so too are there institutions that do not even bother with this step and rather take the intimate for their own use. For example, surveillance of the modern state apparatus both takes what is intimate, and makes what is not intimate intimate. Simone Browne discusses the racialized branding of black bodies not only during the transatlantic slave trade, but into modern surveillance where blackness is indexed by government services (Browne 91). For those who believe that their personal information is part of their intimate identity, the state coopts it for the purpose of controlling populations and gathering information for state and corporate use. This quite clearly happens under a veil of transparency though much of what the state knows about our identity is inaccessible to the average citizen. This can have one of two effects. First, it can tell the subject that this information is intimate, thus influencing how they construct themselves as a subject given what they perceive as intimate. The second option is that they decide that the information the state has access to is no longer intimate given the wide availability of the data. This could exist for example in relation to a person’s sexuality. Without the state having access to this information, this may be extraordinarily intimate and personal, but after the state demands access, they may no longer consider it private or personal. This is as a result of the influence of the assumption of privacy as it relates to intimacy. All this is to say that at times the intimate can be constructed not only based on what the state tells us is intimate, but also based on what we believe to be left over after the state has taken all they want.

## Where do we go from here?
	
	At the end of this paper we are left with a number of important questions. The first is, is it possible for the intimate to be both personal and shared? Given what is said above, I believe that it is most likely the intimate is always shared, or at the very least public. This is because there cannot be a proper presumption of privacy in a state with mass surveillance. This is to say that even if an individual has a characteristic that is considered to be of their deepest nature, because it is outward facing that immediately takes away the intimacy that it is supposed to hold. Furthermore, the fact that the public expression of the intimate is done in institutions that carry with them no requirement of true intimacy means that intimacy does not properly exist in the public sphere either.
	This means we are left with the idea that intimacy is supposed to be both something referring to that which is of the subject’s deepest nature, and a shared connection that subject seeks to fulfill with others. Through the examples of marriage and surveillance, it becomes clear that the true meaning of each of these desires cannot exist in the modern world we have encountered. 
	The subject is self constituting in the sense that it can place its own meaning on that which it assumes to be intimate, but the subject is not all-knowing and all-powerful thus the constituting happens with assumptions made about institutions of power and the culture and society it interacts with each day. The subject therefore likely constitutes itself on the basis of what it feels its deepest nature is at the time but this has been importantly mediated and modulated in artificial ways such that it likely gets the question wrong.
	We must leave this discussion with a number of questions. The first is, is intimacy truly possible between people and are there intimate aspects of our life that we are able to strive to give intimate status despite the challenges above. Similarly, does it matter if the intimate sphere no longer exists in the way we once thought, i.e. what are the stakes? Ultimately, intimacy and subjectivity speak to the core of our identity and experience and are worthy of further study.

## Works Cited
Berlant, Lauren, ed. _Intimacy_. Chicago: U of Chicago Press, 2000. Print.

Berlant, Lauren. _The Queen of America Goes to Washington City_. Durham: Duke U Press, 1997. Print.

Browne, Simone. _Dark Matters_. Durham: Duke U Press, 2015. Print.

Foucault, Michel, and Paul Rabinow. _The Essential Works of Michel Foucault, 1954-1984: Subjectivity and Truth_. 
        London: Penguin, 2000. Print.

Kelly, Mark G. E. , Timothy O'Leary, and Jana Sawicki. "Foucault, Subjectivity, and Technologies of the Self." _A Companion_
       _to Foucault_. Ed. Christopher Falzon. Hoboken: Blackwell Publishing , 2013. 510-25. Print.

Lauer, Christopher. _Intimacy_. London and New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2016. Print.
