Empire is the binding of biopolitical impacts with those of Spectacle. Spectacle, in the way Guy Debord [link!] uses it, is the saturation of lived experience in imagistic mediation, situating bodies at a remove from themselves as they act in the world. Where Empire envelops Spectacle in biopolitics, it translates this mediation into a collective sustenance reworking what a body is, what a relation to a body is, as determined from without, but existing only ever in encounters. Which is to say, Empire is both among us and to our side: it’s not centralized in such as telecommunication, but is rather implemented at a molecular level, in our most intimate motions, in our self-policing, in our diminished behaviors. It is only exercised; it’s gaseous, with sharp pangs to motions wherever one finds oneself. We maintain it, and it maintains us, as specters of vitality. This is meant to be what’s really the antithesis to sensation; the enemy which is the aim of insurrection. To understand this essay right here, you’ll have to forget about ‘government’ or the ‘state’ or the ‘economy’  as solidified sets of procedures which regulate from above, and come to understand the Imperial exercises that manage bodies, Imperial productions of impossibilities, Imperial situations manifesting felt contours, and most importantly, Imperial strategies of separation which subsume forms-of-life in falsifying, degrading subjectivities: the pivot allowing a planetary metaphysics constituted by forces like losses and gains, winners and losers — the responsibility for one-self, which accelerates in the era of the Anthropocene. The era of our annihilation. We aren’t alive to exercise our ordinariness against what’s impending. We’ve been given co-ordinates which render apathy and docility the norm towards which we seek approximation. Let’s at least explode with sensorial presence — I don’t want to go out with alienation from my-self and you. 

This, then, is an essay in description of that which I want to be visible, that which I want to not be grasped as known, nor explained away, nor even presented except as fragments for future use. These are only ever the most partial suggestions. This is not programmatic, nor polemical, nor expository. “What we need is a kind of low theory, for designing integrated solutions on a collaborative basis, which includes many kinds of people’s experience of the labours of the molecular” (Wark, xvi). Right. And so, here is a point at which a flexible theory for comprehending one’s situation may arise in coagulation with something Low. Careful looking at what is in front of you, and how you are within it. Here, then: an essay written to incite thoughts of the phenomenal, rather than to disclose where and what you are.

So, two parts. First: the incision to return to presence, to find it, embrace it, such that our totalization can be seen from where we are, wherever we are. And second: a force in the world opposing this return, a material flow in separation of forms-of-life, in categorical distinctions, in the production of subjectivities. Let any results be yours.  

— 

One’s form-of-life, from now on to be pluralized, is as if bare life — the smallest necessity of aliveness, the most reduced idea of what a living creature or thing is — were contingently in contact with the singular, infinite power of the possible. If bare life is to “mold a material from the outside, material that would otherwise remain formless” (T-YG, 12), then forms-of-life are the coalescing into situational affection the Beingness of a creature or thing from within this material, to be affirmed or left alone. Seen or not. Forms-of-life are the existential imperatives of the living. Not the qualities inherent to the living, but how those qualities are. Forms-of-life contain the power to incline towards particulars.

Forms-of-life are the motions of selves, but they’re stuffed under guises of identity, categorical inscriptions of behavior, coercing its infinite inclinations towards possibilities that are pre-determined. As one approaches their singular forms-of-life, they approach the presence that frees sensation from naming, that frees thinking from vacuous critique. Of course, to be sure, one makes compromises: there’s no (more) utopias. Of course, one dissuades from whatever-being, if one is like me, because of just what it sounds like. How is it to produce change in the world? Who is allowed to be whatever?

To embrace one’s forms-of-life is not a mechanism for getting things done. Rather, it’s to incite an un-becoming. It’s useful not because we’re all to inhere back into these singular-plural presences. It’s to offer a tool of apperception. A means of revealing the contours one is made to live in. It does not, all alone, dissolve subjectivity. Rather, it lessens the brunt of subjectivity, it alleviates the burdens of commodifiable lack and failure — although such feelings do remain. Subjectivity becomes a softer posture. One sees another world, and it’s this one (cite Wark).

To embrace one’s forms-of-life is not about completion, nor finality. It’s about the process of always coming to the terms of one’s situation from the traversed site of one’s being. From this position, we can draw up maps. We can get organized by getting composed. We can see all that they’ve taken on the most molecular scale. It’s an optical and sensorial proposal: to precisely see the self as the self is made over by material forces, and to precisely feel how you are otherwise. Not what you are that isn’t what they tell you to be, although that’s extremely important too. Instead: a perception, an apperception, of how you are what you are, hence how you are to do what you’re to do. Which Imperial strategies are you to consider as especially productive of your existential conformity? How are you captureable as exactly what they’ve made you to be? How are you otherwise? 

To reduce subjectivity’s tiring weight is to deflect, at points of contact between forces and surfaces, the new regime’s “claim to every aspect of being”, its “power to designate any part of that being as a resource” where the subject doubles as producer and consumer of abstracted value (Wark, 284). Hence subjectivity overlays and is overlaid by commodification, channeling desires in self-circulation. This means: communally maintained ideals/images/objects everybody strives for in approximation of a spectacular elsewhere. This contours desiring flows outside of presence and into a perpetual production of captureable signs away from bodies and near to abstraction. The degradation of presence equates with the collapsing of experience into subjectivity, the collapsing of the self from one’s forms-of-life and into desiring flows away from the self. To valorize oneself, maintain oneself, forget about oneself for Empire.

The most emphatic forces of neoliberal subjectivity are governmentality and citizenry. (There are many. These are two.) These technologies polarize: like tactile forces they converge. The overdeveloped world coheres into a frenzied pacification. Into a collective taste for docility. Any lengths for it, including the relentless production of hypocritical concepts (cite Wark) attuned to the seductions of a self-sustained management of forms-of-life. Seduced into continuously — through these strategies of governance and of “indignant citizen” consciences (T, 213)  — depriving bodies of potential. The tyranny of a managerial responsibility is from where subjectivity arises. A particularized array of motions produced by these contours and productive of these contours.

If forces render selves, if one’s corporeality is just the gathering point for traversal affects, flows, relations, then we’ve got to obviate which of these forces construct the predicates of lives. What are our inclinations and where do we find ourselves blackmailed into specified becomings? Where do we find intensification? Where do we find nullification? I want to ask about strategies rendering me incapacitated, strategies rendering certain of my friends more incapacitated than me. These are questions, surely, of who is frayed to where immediate care is necessary. But also, these are questions about where and how a situation may occur that un-becomes us, that annihilates predication, that is only intensity. No answers yet.

Instead: a turn to the everyday, where a praxis or an anti-praxis is only ever the comprehension, a sense, of one’s situational potential. Where there is deprivation in these areas, there is deprivation everywhere. To be very clear: there is no outside of that which we inhabit. But just the same, there’s new attenuations in the peripheries, which increasingly are becoming public spaces. The occupations of abstractions (cite/link Wark). The suctions and aversions of bodies inhabiting the public becomes threatening to senses of managerial responsibility. Enter the police when self-policing no longer deprives. When it’s a shock we’re all here.

And here: to render visible, to offer a “new cartography”, to offer conceptual means to the side of critique, to cohere presence with struggle (T, 216). Or, for those of us still enveloped in neoliberal estrangement such that they’re too separated from their forms-of-life to sense their own presence, too disengaged to sense the relational power of proximity to oneself and to others — for those of us here, I write for a return to an embrace with one’s presence. From there, perhaps, an embrace with new inclinations towards what’s possible. The power of forms-of-life in motion towards inhabitation. “There are other worlds and they are this one” (Wark, ??). Or, in the age of the Anthropocene, at least a resilience. A vitality in encounters with inevitabilities. A person can’t always (ever) help what they do, where they are. Instead: an intimacy with the how they are doing things and where they are doing them, and what these forces have got to do with one another.   

—

Governmentality, the practice of managing conducts, becomes self-practice. The mode of relation between ‘subjects’. Empire’s most virile claim is that we exist on a plane of equality in competition of one another as to who amongst us will make it to the ‘top’. More and more, the top is bare survival here, and there, it’s Spectacle. The impression of equity in enforced equality.

Governmentality is inextricable from circulation, from the relentless asymmetry of neoliberal production. A production which reifies those who are mobile, and which shadows laborious energies arising from categories of being that it disparages even as it’s what makes them. This is a shifting fixity, a perpetual sustenance of self-practice as if it were valorizing for the forms-of-life in situation. Who accumulates value; who gets to; who needs to but does not; who doesn’t need to but does; and so on. 

The situation appears total. It appears as a covering abstraction of tightly wound mutating enclosures. Inclinations run into a partition encompassing motion as motions occur. It’s individualizing, it’s in your way. Even before this, the situation predicts specified motions, and contradicts others. Everywhere there’s this reduction of what’s to happen through the heightened contouring of how things can happen.

Governmentality becomes inextricable as an exerting force, a play of surface contacts inhering into ‘society’. The state, the corporation, the perforations of technology, the body. Subsuming all matter into abstraction is the overdeveloped world’s cohesion. Bodily machinations equate with and contaminate machinations to the side of bodies, all in production of Empire’s grey pulsating signs. A shared meaning which is Empire’s property, finally; their infrastructure.

Governmentality is not ephemeral. It is present. It is communally sustained such that its presence is total. If one participates, or has participated (traces can be governed productively) in overdeveloped ‘society’ then one is necessarily governed, necessarily governs themselves, necessarily governs others. “Nothing matters less to Empire than the question, ‘who controls what?’ — provided, of course, that control has been established” (Tiqqun). We can go further and suggest that self-policing is Empire’s method of us controlling ourselves, which keeps the property question in tact, which keeps the captureable molecular preceding the vanquished, tarnished molar. Not one scale without the other, of course. But let us assume this precedent.

Governmentality is co-contaminant with each of its fissuring surfaces. It’s mutable to the rhythms of the elusive and the unavoidable: all those apparatuses that predicate everyday life. This everyday becomes compatible with management insofar as the everyday is that which produces the technics manifesting the possible. There is nothing other than the everyday. One’s self-practices reify themselves.

Governmentality produces the immanent and falsely transcendent planes on which forms-of-life may incline towards particulars. Every surface that’s abrasively tactile with forms-of-life incites their motions in contoured directions. My desire is not my own but is rather existent in the abstraction into which I inhere such that I may be compatibly productive of signs, signs which may or may not contain value, depending on who I am meant to be. Who I am designed to become. Forms-of-life are “incarnated [as] subjectivities which are simultaneously bound and struggling to determine the conditions of their development”; the “productive body or the production of the (gendered, racialized) body is a continuous process” (Precarias a la Deriva) whose interstitially total outcome is a subjectivity mutable to a situation. Which is to say, to forms-of-life that become captureable, transferable, overridden, vacuous, predicated, and inequitably so; subsumed by Imperial appearances into approximations of specified differences, in pacified contest. Here: the tyranny of a governmentality whose contours vary from category to category; self to self at a level of singular inscription unto categorical potentialities; and maintained through relations to and between singularities. Everybody’s compromised, everybody’s totalized. Such is where we must clarify who is frayed to incapacitation and who is mobile. Such is where self-practice must shift from considerations of motions that are sovereign to motions that cannot be helped through ‘will’. Where forms-of-life are polarized into their capture, only then coming to fill out the contours of their desire. 

If motion is bound to situational desire and degrees of emotional and bodily capacity, then, this means that we come to motion into our circumscription whose mesmerisation is pacification, whose impossibilities produce what’s possible. The demand for our potentiality to degrade into docility. Forms-of-life vigorously want to become all that they can be for Empire. This involves becoming citizens, flinging the self by necessity away from presence and into a subjectivity compatible with generating affect-value from what might’ve been an embrace.

Citizens, then, from the practice of rendering oneself available for labour, from the total capturing of managerial bodies, from the practice of eternalizing work as a necessity for the good life, from the practice of conjuring — or more precisely, having conjured for you — a special taste for work in itself. The compulsion to live out predicates. The tying of beings, captured into categories, in compulsion to specified predicates, motioning on the substratum we’ve all made with and for Empire. The citizen is who feels responsible for the curation of themselves as approximations of ideals, and even for the curation of others’ approximations of same. Feeling an intimacy entwined with their increasing alienation, the citizen participates. Thus “to whom does this body belong, this body that grows old, gets fat, gets deformed, and makes me work to maintain it and keep it in conformity with the parameters of what’s desirable? Desirable for whom?” (Tiqqun).

—

“It may begin like this: there would be the sight, on a floor in one of these sinister glass hives of the service sector, this interminable scene, through panopticized space, of dozens of settled bodies, all in a row, arranged according to modular logic, dozens of apparently lifeless bodies, separated by thin glass walls, tapping away on their computers. Within the scene would in turn come the revelation of the brutally political character of this frantic immobilization of bodies. And the obvious paradox of bodies growing stiller the more their mental functions are activated, captivated, mobilized, the more their mental functions seethe, responding in real time to the fluctuations of the information flow streaming across the screen. Let us take this scene or rather what we find there and bring it with us…”
	(Tiqqun, 2011, 139.) 

Works Cited/Texts Used 

Debord, Guy. _Society of the Spectacle._ Translated by Donald Nicholson-Smith. Zone Books, 1994. 
Precarias a la Deriva, “First Stutterings of ‘Precarias a la Deriva.'” Web. 
Tiqqun, _Introduction to Civil War._ Translated by Alexander R. Galloway and Jason E. Smith. Semiotext(e), 2010.
Tiqqun, "Sonogram of a Potential." Unknown translator. [I hear it's from _Tiqqun 2_. No official translation.] Web.  
Tiqqun, _This is Not a Program._ Translated by Joshua David Jordan. Semiotext(e), 2011.
Wark, McKenzie. _A Hacker Manifesto._ Harvard University Press, 2004. 

 
 

	 
