## Introduction

As a university student, if you were interested in learning about networks, you might simply open up your laptop and type “networks” into the Google search bar. You would then be presented with the following definitions: 

1. A group or system of interconnected people or things. 
2. An arrangement of intersecting horizontal and vertical lines. 

From these definitions provided, the concept of “a network” seems upfront and simple. However, networks operate in real-time and can be seen manifested in real-life in a multitude of complex forms. This entry examines networks through the theory of Alexander Galloway, as an exemplary theorist of media. Galloway’s theoretical work follows that of Gilles Deleuze, and is particular inspired by his work in “Postscript on Control Societies.” Galloway is both a writer and computer programmer who is working on issues in philosophy, technology, and theories of mediation (New York University 1). This entry will look at Networks through the concepts and theory that Galloway presents in his texts _Protocol, Excommunication_ and _Critical Terms for Media Studies._
	In order to define networks in an approachable and comprehensible fashion, this entry will first provide a framework of network form by exploring Galloway’s concepts of [[The Chain of Triumph and The Web of Ruin]](#the/chain/of/triumph/and/the/web/of/ruin-networks), as well as Centralized, Decentralized and Distributed Networks. The principles of [Protocol](#protocol-networks) will then be analyzed as a means of understanding Galloway’s theoretical approach to networks. Finally, to exemplify Networks in a more tangible way, this entry will include a section on The Ungraspable, and will conclude with a section on Networks in Terms of Social and Political Change.

## The Chain of Triumph and The Web of Ruin

Galloway begins with a discussion of the tragedy of _Agamemnon_, wherein he highlights two terms that are important when considering the topic of networks. He explains how networks shift between two formal structures, the first being the ‘chain of triumph’; the other being what he calls the ‘web of ruin’ (Galloway, "Networks" 281). According to Galloway, the chain of triumph is linear, efficient, and functional. It is made of pure energy, and it is contagious and additive as it moves. It is communicative, telepresent, directional, and follows a chain of command. Finally, the chain of triumph is constitutive of reality rather than destructive of it (Galloway, "Networks" 281). On the opposing side of this network oscillation is the web of ruin. Oppose it does, as the web of ruin is nothing like the chain of triumph. Instead, it is a nonlinear mesh, not a linear chain, designed to ensnare and delimit “even the most intractable opponent” (Galloway, "Networks" 281). The web of ruin is commonly characterized as a swarm, or a pack of animals, unknowable in quality and innumerable in form. Less concerned with connectivity, the web brings with it a flood of insatiable persecution. This net is not a tonic, tethering together distant elements, but rather Galloway explains it as a solvent set on dissolving those ties. Ultimately, the web undoes the chain ("Networks" 281). Galloway’s approach to networks is centered on this idea between the constant teetering between the chain of triumphs and the web of ruin. He began his text with the _Agamemnon_ literary reference to make a point that networks are not exclusive to the twentieth century technologies (Galloway, "Networks" 282). In order to understand networks, it is crucial to understand the variety of manifestations of the word, and that the basic notions that lie behind networks have been vastly present in human life long before the emergence of modern technologies. This awareness is essential when considering the broad scope of network possibilities. However, when approaching networks from a technological stance, the modern technological implementation of networks remains at the forefront of this discussion. Even when contained to the realm of modern technology, Galloway expresses that network manifestations are still diverse and plentiful.

>“There are many kinds of networks; they are not internally simple, nor globally uniform. Some networks are rigid and hierarchal, while others are flexible and resist hierarchy. Some networks, like the chain of triumph, tend to create order; others, like the web of ruin, to dissolve it” (Galloway, 228)

What differentiates networks from a mere collection of components is that they are systems of interconnectivity that hold components together (Galloway, "Networks" 283).  It is this notion of connectedness, and the binding together of parts that distinguishes networks. Galloway’s text includes the useful analogy: “Thus a forest is not a network, but a forest’s _ecosystem is_”(283).  

Within _Networks_, Galloway provides an abundance of useful information that can be extracted from the text to better understand what exactly technological networks are, and how they operate. He mentions that elements of mathematics including graph theory, has had a great influence on networks. Graph theory has provided descriptive vocabulary that has been adapted into discussion of net of work theory, including vocabulary such as “graphs” which refers to groups and links (Galloway, "Networks" 284). Additionally, Galloway provides a definition of cybernetic systems, which when considering networks in terms of technology, is critical to grasp. “Cybernetic systems are essentially communication networks in which information may pass between system components, effecting their ongoing states” (284).  

## Centralized, Decentralized and Distributed Networks

Networks can be seen embodied in three major forms which were first conceptualized by Paul Baran in the 1960’s. Galloway introduces these concepts in _Protocol_ and further condenses these networks approachably in his text _Networks_. The first type of network described by Galloway is the ‘Centralized’ network, which is characterized by a singular hub with a number of branches extending to peripheral nodes (Galloway, “Networks” 288). In the case of Centralized networks, this singular hub is the central power point, and the branches, or satellite nodes, are only connected to the central host (Galloway, “Protocol” 11). Centralized networks can be exemplified through communication apps such as the “WhatsApp.” 

The second formation of network is the ‘Decentralized’ network. This network is a mixture of both centralized and distributed networks, as it combines a number of hierarchal star subnetworks, the hubs of which are interconnected via backbone links into a larger amalgam (Galloway, “Networks” 288). Decentralized networks are distinct from the centralized and distributed networks because they are specific architectures characterized by equity between nodes, bidirectional links, a high degree of redundancy, and a general lack of internal hierarchy (Galloway, “Networks” 288). In other words, they have a multitude of central hosts, rather than just one. Within these first two types of networks, communication generally travels unidirectionally (Galloway, “Protocol, 11). Simply sharing files over a computer without a third party would be an example of a Decentralized network at play. 

The final type of network form is labeled the ‘Distributed’ network, as described in Protocol as “a structural form without center that resembles a web or meshwork” (Galloway, “Protocol” 3). An example of a Distributed network is the Internet, or World Wide Web. According to Galloway, “Each point in a distributed network is neither a central hub nor a satellite node—there are neither trunks nor leaves” (“Protocol” 3). The Distributed network is native to Deleuze’s control societies and can be seen as a diagram for our current social formation (Galloway, “Protocol” 11). The distributed network is illustrated in Figure 1-C of the attached diagram. In his text _Networks_, Galloway provides this insightful definition of Distributed networks that help us to think about their structure:

>“An extremely complex network topology that contains within it a curious synthesis of both the web of ruin and the chain of triumph. The distributed “mesh” network is spread out horizontally with a large number of links connecting all nodes. No single node acts as master of the network. Each node making local decisions about network topology and message sending, thus spreading organization and control is integrated broadly across the entire mesh” (288). 

The significance of Distributed networks is that in order to initiate communication, the two connected nodes must, as Galloway puts it, “speak the same language” (“Protocol” 12).  According to Galloway, this is what makes protocol important, as shared protocols are what define the landscape of a network and who is connected to whom (“Protocol” 12). This relevant connection is what initiates a discussion of protocol in the following section. 

## Protocol

Protocol is the principle of organization native to computers, specifically in distributed networks (Galloway, “Protocol” 7). Galloway uses an analogy of a highway system as a means of explaining protocol. Similarly, one can imagine an electrical grid, or the human circulatory system as an analogous demonstration of protocol and how it works in terms of networks. In the circulatory system, there are seemingly innumerous combinations of veins and arteries through which nutrients and blood can travel in order to reach their destinations. However, there are certain ways they cannot travel, certain valves that control the flow of blood and keeps it going in one direction. Capillaries at the end of the bodily route deliver nutrients to every cell through the veins. Thinking back to technology, these conventional rules that govern the set of possible behaviour patterns with in a heterogeneous system are what computer scientists call protocol. Protocol, then, is a technique for achieving voluntary regulation with in a contingent environment (Galloway, “Protocol” 7).

>“The protocols that govern much of the Internet are contained in what are called RFC (Request For Comments) documents called “the primary documentation of the Internet,”9 these technical memoranda detail the vast majority of standards and protocols in use on the Internet today” (Galloway, “Protocol” 6).

Within the realm of computer science and technology, protocol is what governs how specific technologies are used, how they are agreed to, adopted, and implemented around the world (Galloway, “Protocol” 6).


## The Ungraspable
Networks have taken on an identity of a behind the scenes, unknown ‘thing’ that just happens. Somewhere in the tangled mess of wires, our technologies somehow _just work._ Somehow, you turn on your phone and you have access to thousands of apps, social media, and communication. New media technologies bring something new into existence that we can’t quite understand with our senses. Media are not object that can be be picked up and examined, and are thus hard for us to locate.

>“Frames, windows, doors, and other thresholds are those transparent devices that achieve more the less they do : for every moment of virtuosic immersion and connectivity, for every moment of volumetric delivery, of inopacity, the threshold ?becomes one notch more invisible, one notch more inoperable” (Galloway, “The Interface Effect” 25).  

Media and network technologies always seem to happen somewhere elsewhere, you cannot know what is going on, you cannot see it, and for that reason it is ungraspable. What then, allows us to see and think about these specific kinds of technologies? “To succeed, then, is at best self-deception and at worst self-annihilation. One must work hard to cast the glow of unwork. Operability engenders inoperability” (Galloway, “The Interface Effect” 25). Examining real-life networks is one way to attempt to think about networks in a tangible way. Understanding networks is important because not only do we utilize their capabilities on a daily basis, but they are also having an affect on society and individuals constantly. The fact that in general, nobody seems to actually know how digital networks are operating is both interesting and very concerning. “A final reason is to define networks not as abstract concepts describing shape or structure, but as specific technologies of power, organization, and control” Galloway, “Networks” 282). By first examining the descriptive and structural aspects of networks, this knowledge can be applied to real-life manifestations of networks in order to understand how networks operate every day. In concluding his text _Netoworks_, Galloway identifies four ramifications that networked media have for the critical theory of network form (293). Summarized, the four ramifications are as follows:

1. Informatic networks are relatively indifferent to semantic content and interpretation. The data that is transferred through networks is not “read” in a human sense, but rather parsed using a non-human kind of analytics. Galloway goes on to propose that there needs to be a new way of reading implemented (290, 291).

2. The second ramification is what Galloway suggests might be called political strategy of interactivity (291). Today, interactivity is one of the core instruments of control and organization according to Galloway.

3. The tendency for software to privilege surface over source, while at the same time championing sources as absolutely essentially even hidden is the third ramification (292). The importance that Galloway draws from this is that software hides itself at exactly the moment when it expresses itself most fully (292). 

4. Finally, the new relationship between the web of ruin and the chain of triumph suggests new scenes of political interest (292). The two avenues that Galloway suggests, using networks as a fulcrum, are the political questions that issue from a formal congruency “within” the network, and political questions that issue from the space “without” (292, 293).

Focusing on Galloway’s informative illustration of networks presents a clear framework for understanding networks in the modern era. This understanding should also spark the realization that there are many forms and issues at play when considering the functioning of technological networks. Networks are anything but straightforward, and in order to grasp the entirety of their functions, one must explore the different avenues in which networks operate today. In order to exemplify modern technological networks at play, we will now turn to a discussion of tangible, visible networks. 

## Networks in Terms of Social and Political Change

One way to approach networks in order to make them more tangible is to think about those networks that you probably use every day.

>“In this context, networks refer to broadcast technologies for creation and distribution such as radio and television ?networks, telecommunication technologies such as telegraph and telephone networks, and information processing and transfer systems such as the Internet” (Galloway, “Networks” 283).

Consider social networking apps such as Facebook, Linkedin, Twitter, Instagram, and the dozens of others. What all of these programs have in common is their primary use – connectedness. Referring back to Galloway’s analogy of a forest’s ecosystem being a network, we can see how Facebook’s millions of users alone are not a network, but as soon as the “Add Friend+” Button is clicked, the network is formed. Although this approach to networks is technological, it is important not to overlook the different meanings that the term network encompasses.

>“In the social sciences and humanities, sociology and anthropology study networks in social and cultural contexts, and economics in the analysis or markets, while fields such as semiotics view language and culture as complex networks of meaning-making exchange” (Galloway 283).

Socially, we can view the family, the friend group, the sports teams, the club affiliations and associations as examples of different forms of functioning networks.  

According to Galloway, interactivity is one of the core instruments of control and organization today. “Clicks are accumulated. Behaviours are mined for meaningful data or tracked for illegal data. Even the genome is prospected for rare or otherwise useful sequences”(“Networks” 291). Examples of this data mining are present in many modern institutions. Two major examples are social networking sites and banking institutions, who mine and sell vast amounts of data retrieved through networks in order to sell to companies for marketing and selling insight. Even institutions such as the military are interested in utilizing information that it passed through online networks for Intel. 

>“In the hands of the American military, networks are classified not only as communication tools but as weapons systems, ?while in the hands of antiglobalization activists, networks are mobilized as tools for disruption and evasion. Thus, I mean to point out the differences between different kinds of networks, both in their architectonic shape and in their values and motivations, but also to point out that different network forms might be in conflict with on another…”(Galloway, “Networks” 282).

Networks can also be observed in terms of their capacity for political ramifications, but also political change. More recently, the worldwide women’s marches and anti-Trump protests that have taken place owe their massive turnouts to the networks that facilitated communication and organization between individuals. “This is crucial to one’s present understanding – that networks are often _symbols for_, or actual embodiments of, real world power and control” (Galloway 282). In the case of the recent protests, networks can also be seen as embodiments of resistance.


### Works Cited

Galloway, Alexander R., Eugene Thacker, and McKenzie Wark. _Excommunication:_ three inquiries in media and mediation. Chicago: The U 	of Chicago Press, 2014. Print.

Galloway, Alexander R. "Networks." Hansen, Mark B.N. _Critical Terms for Media Students_. Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 2010.

Galloway, Alexander R. _Protocol, Or, How Control Exists after Decentralization_. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2004. Print.

New York University, NYU Steinhardt. Faculty, Alexander Galloway, Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development, 2017. Par. 1.http://steinhardt.nyu.edu/faculty/Alexander_Galloway

