## Introduction: The Difficulty with Definitions 

Although definitions are supposed to be a way of categorizing words for clear comprehension, definitions can be tricky none the less. If one looks up the word “norm” in the Oxford English Dictionary, it reads “something that is usual, typical, or standard” or “a required standard; a level to be complied with or reached”. At first glance, this definition may seem logical and expected for the word at issue, but it still raises two questions. First, how is it that this typicality or standard gets decided upon within and across a population? And second, how does it become a requirement and in turn, and more importantly, what does this mean for the individuals that are required to follow the standard? The goal of this entry is not to fully answer these questions but rather to engage with multiple lines of thought to help negotiate some of the ambiguity involved.

To deal with the first problem and how “the usual” comes to be, it is necessary to understand how norms function as contextually specific and also relative. Norms function differently in various contexts, which complicates how they are supposedly agreed upon within a population, and will therefore be explored in this entry. To deal with the second problem, it is possible to ask how power and control work in these contexts to create the meaning of a norm. To engage with these issues, this entry will look at multiple works in three lines of inquiry to see how norms are dealt with in contextually specific ways relevant to the authors and their time of writing. First, while exploring the concepts of the “normal” and “pathological”, Georges Canguilhem engages with issues of normativity in the scientific and medical realm, which is a good starting point as a way to understand how averages define normalcy as a means to put value judgements on health and illness. Next, Michel Foucault engages with norms and their functions of power both in disciplinary systems and sexuality and sexual identity. Lastly, in the contemporary context, it is possible to look at Michael Warner’s work on homosexuality to help provide a new way of conceptualizing norms, by reframing the logic around issues of worth and how they inform behaviour. 

For the scope of this entry, there are a few things to keep in mind. First, norms can take on contextually specific meanings, and they therefore become abstractions (see [[Virtual ization ]] ) that are assumed to be agreed upon, falsely, across a population. In reality, they are ambiguous and not explicitly determined. Next, norms prove to be significant to a population by becoming an influential power that can mould individual behaviour, through conformity, as a way of exerting control over a population (see [[Population]] ). 

## How Are Norms Created?: A Matter of Value and Average 

Georges Canguilhem’s book _Le normal et le pathologique_, originally published in 1966, is a very helpful starting point in a discussion of norms and normativity. This book, crudely speaking, bases its analysis on what constitutes as normal and pathological in the biological realm and is in a way at the foundational level in discussing how the creation of norms has such a large impact on human populations (if we can take the human body as a relatively important entity). Canguilhem brings up issues in this specific context through the “biological norms” of health and disease, within a larger medical context. Canguilhem addresses a great amount in _Le normal et le pathologique_ so the goal of exploring his work is not to create a comprehensive account of the book but rather to discuss how “norm” can be conceptualized in relation to averages, values and ambiguity specific to the scientific context. 

The first thing to note of importance is when Canguilhem explores how pathology and illness help to create a conception of “norm”, existing as its opposing force to help define it. He writes that “the biological normal, […], is revealed only through infractions of the norm and that concrete or scientific awareness of life exists only through disease” (118). In the biological realm, the biological norm is created in opposition to disease or pathology, which is not necessarily more rare than health, but is regarded as such, which gives way to falsely believing that norms occur naturally and are equivalent to health. Health (physiology) and diseases (pathology) are both states that can exist in life, but our need for therapeutics and medicine to restore us to a natural state begs the question of what this natural state is: what is deemed normal but  is never explicitly defined. To this, he says, “ There is no fact which is normal or pathological in itself […] The pathological is not the absence of a biological norm: it is another norm but one which is, comparatively speaking, pushed aside by life” (144). Hence, norms do not have inherent meaning and in a way, both ‘normal’ and pathological’ are defined through a constructed abstraction related to life, as both are related to it but neither exist as equal to it. 

This line of thinking fits in well to how Canguilhem relates the creation of norms to an issue of values. He says that what is common in past and present conceptions of disease is “that they form a judgment of virtual value” (121), as desirable and normal values include “life, a long life, the capacity for reproduction and for physical work […]” (122), whereas “disease is a general concept of non-value which includes all possible negative values” (121). When being normal depends on a standard determined by values, a relative standard incorrectly becomes an absolute one. Value influences what one believes to be both required and desired, which controls individual decisions and goals. With this value judgement comes ambiguity because of a norm’s dual meaning as “that which is such that it ought to be” and “that which is met in the majority of cases of a determined kind” (125). This ambiguity is apparent in the meaning of normal “where one is happy to point out its existence rather than see in it a problem to solve” (126). When norms become valued as “an ideal type” (125), it might be possible to recognize them, but quite difficult to be critical of them because they are so abstractly constructed and highly valued, without being explicitly defined in their independent existence. 

Next, when placing norms in relation to populations, and taking the concept of generality into consideration, it is important to note how averages influence norms and can therefore be mistaken as norms. Canguilhem says, “it seems that in the concept of average the physiologist finds an objective and scientifically valid equivalent to the concept of normal or norm” (151). Believing that norms are equivalent to averages brings with it a mistake, because something that is the most frequent is not the same as something that is “normal”. And then, when an average gets substituted as a norm, subsequent norms get created to support the perpetuity of the average as norm. For example, when Canguilhem says that “ an average which determines that the greatest divergences [from the average] are rare is actually a norm” (158). Hence, even the concepts of things that differ from a norm (deviations or rarities) become a norm themselves. This process helps perpetuate the already existing norm (which has been determined by its high frequency), because the opposites of the norm must exist in order to reinforce the norm’s own existence. 

The concept of averages - as that which is occurring most often - does not account for the nuance or specificity of the difference that exists between individuals in a population. Hence, “social norms are to be invented not observed” (259) because when something is deemed normal in the biological context, it is understood as being “objectively defined in terms of the frequency of the characteristic so qualified” (261). Therefore, norms become created by averages of a specific characteristic within a population and  “effectively characterize the most numerous groups distinctively formed by the individuals of a natural population made to appear identical by measurement” (261). The processes of qualifying averages as norms, placing values on them, consequently inventing social norms from them and perpetuating their existence through their supposed opposition to pathology or disease, create a possibility for individual behaviour to be influenced in a way that sees conformity as necessary and desirable. 

## Norms and Discipline: Bringing Power Into the Conversation 

Georges Canguilhem was helpful in laying some of the groundwork towards understanding the complex nature of norms, and continuing on, Michel Foucault expands on how norms are defined in opposition to something and is interested in how norms relate to functions of power. Foucault’s _Discipline and Punish_ will be at issue in this section, followed by _The History of Sexuality_ in the next. There is an overwhelming amount of relevant content to discuss in Foucault’s work, so this section is going to focus on a single passage that helps to explore norms and their relevance to the disciplinary context, echoing some of Canguilhem’s concerns. 

In the section “The means of correct training” in Foucault’s 1977 _Discipline and Punish_, he writes

>The art of punishing […] brings five quite distinct operations into play: it refers individual actions to a whole that is at once a field of comparison, a space of differentiation and the principle of a rule to be followed. It differentiates individuals from one another, in terms of the following overall rule: that the rule be made to function as a minimal threshold, as an average to be respected or as an optimum towards which one must move. It measures in quantitative terms and hierarchizes in terms of value the abilities, the level, the ‘nature’ of individuals. It introduces, through this ‘value-giving’ measure, the constraint of a conformity that much be achieved. Lastly, it traces the limit that will define difference in relation to all other differences, the external frontier of the abnormal. […] The perpetual penality that traverses all points and supervises every instant in the disciplinary institutions compares, differentiates, hierarchizes, homogenizes, excludes. In short, it normalizes (182,183). 

There is a lot to address in this passage. Foucault echoes many concerns of Canguilhem but adds another dimension to the conversation – how power is related to norms, specifically in the disciplinary and punishment context. Foucault sees norms in this context as a type of rule that is to be followed, if one does not want to be penalized. Like Canguilhem, the concept of averages, values and the abnormal come up, which remains important. The rules that must be followed, mandated mostly by legal systems, arise from the determined average that becomes valued as a goal or standard to be achieved and therefore required. Hence, in relation to the constructed norm that exists in the population, it is supposed to regulate that behaviour on the level of the individual, to in turn reinforce the constructed norm in the population, in a mutually reinforcing way. In the context of legal and prison systems, normalizing the judgement that we define as “correct” or “incorrect” behaviour helps enable the process of controlling population values through norms affecting people at the individual level. This happens when the individual becomes the “delinquent” and this term becomes a way to label a group of people as different form an “offender”, as the delinquent’s "deviant" life is more relevant than their “incorrect” act in characterizing them (251). Both the delinquent and the offender get punished, but the delinquent encompasses a norm, whereas the offender encompasses an act. The delinquent “is not only the author of his acts […] but is linked to his offence by a whole bundle of complex threads” (253). When individuals are conditioned to behave in a way opposite to delinquency in their conscious will, instincts, drives and character (253), they reinforce a norm by following the normative rule not to be a delinquent because it says more (negatively) about the individual compared to their population than it would an offender. (For more see [[Discipline]] )

## Norms and Sexuality: Perverse Implantation 

In Foucault’s 1976 book _A History of Sexuality Volume 1: An Introduction_, the relationship that sexuality has to norms and power is slightly more subtle than in the disciplinary context, but is still highly relevant (see [[Sexuality]] ). Instead of norms functioning through legal and prison systems to exert control over a population by creating an ideal for behaviour, Foucault proposed the concept of “perverse implantation” as a way for sexual perversions to be reinforced as negative, thereby creating more discourse around them (ultimately reinforcing the norm). Foucault describes a discourse created around sexuality that wanted to reduce or exclude sexual practices whose object was not procreation, where “legal sanctions against minor perversions were multiplied; sexual irregularity was annexed to mental illness [which created] a norm of sexual development and [described] all the possible deviations carefully” (36). Although this goal may not be as prevalent in a contemporary context, it is important to understand those sexualities “othered” through discourse over the centuries.  Whereas three major explicit codes – canonical law, the Christian pastoral and civil law – governed sexual practices up to the end of the eighteenth century, mainly focusing on marital relations, Foucault thinks that through discourse “our epoch has initiated sexual heterogeneities” (37) instead of being repressive towards different sexualities. Hence, multiple acts that were not part of a norm related to marriage, reproduction and heterosexuality, were seen as an “unnatural” dimension of sexuality, decided upon in a lawful context and reinforced through legal prohibitions. Even though the recognition of the number of these acts have been increasing through the discourse created around them, they “became things that were essentially different” by being “offenses against the regularity of natural function” (39). And when natural function has consistently been defined as heterosexuality, reproduction and monogamy, discourses around what are considered different, unnatural or deviant becomes facilitated. 

To clarify the difference between what may be considered a sexual norm from what is considered a deviation from “normal sexuality”, power can again be addressed in relation to the constructed and reinforcing nature of norms, in this case through institutional influence. After a discursive explosion in the eighteenth and nineteenth century, “medicine made a forceful entry into the pleasures of the couple: it created an entire organic, functional or mental pathology arising out of ‘incomplete’ sexual practices; [carefully classifying] all forms of related pleasures […] and it undertook to manage them”, therefore labelling disparate sexualities to exert a certain form of power over individuals’ sexuality (41). Through initial (supposed) repression of discussing sexuality, “perverse” sexualities actually came to be spoken about more frequently by powers that sought to eradicate them, and actually created more discussion of “odd” sexualities. 

In order to explore the type of power that Foucault is discussing as it relates to the rejection of certain peripheral forms of sexuality, he conceives of four operations of power “quite different from simple prohibition” (41). First, conduct became prescribed, where some behaviour was deemed unacceptable and regulated by institutional judgement and control. For example, things like incest, adultery and child sexuality have been regulated by various systems including law penalty and medicine and regimentation (41). Next, the incorporation of perversions and a new specification of individuals, where power was exercised not by suppressing perversions but specifying and implanting them in bodies (42). In this way, the person becomes perverse and guilty of the act, rather than the act itself being the perversion. Thirdly, to exert power, the oddities of sex relied on a technology of health and pathology (44), ultimately labelling those with “normal and healthy sexualities” as different from those with "perverse and pathological" ones. Lastly, , the concept of the “legitimate couple” has had their sexuality reduced (45) and through this growth of labelling perversions came multiple sexualities that became rigidified and stuck to age, place and type of practice (48). Hence, norms prevailed. 

## Our Contemporary Moment: Can We Resist? 

In Michael Warner’s book _The Trouble with Normal: Sex, Politics, and the Ethics of Queer Life_, he details some issues that arise in relation to normativity in the homosexual and queer context (see [[Queerness]]). Warner’s thoughts are well situated after Foucault’s, as he places issues of sexuality and sex in a more contemporary context. Whereas Foucault marks a shift towards labelling multiple sexual behaviours as perverse, Warner speaks to how the stigma around group sexual identities still exists to this day. The stigma that exists against homosexuals is itself reinforced through a fear of stigma (i.e. of being stigmatized) within the population of the “normals”, and those that are stigmatized against find a commonality in their suffering (43). This creates an ambiguity within the stigmatized individual, where they feel as if they belong to a group and are comfortable with it until they are told it is an “incorrect” way to identify and exist (42). But, similar to how Canguilhem spoke of norms being created by averages and whatever is considered opposite or rare in comparison, stigma gets perpetuated by the constant distinction between two groups that are commonly perceived as opposite. What Warner notes though, that is extremely important, is the fact that to be fully normal and behave completely normally is impossible (54). Even if an individual belongs to a “majority” group, they will never be part of a population that has all of those majority characteristics. So, this distance created between groups of people based on their behaviour or identity has little validity. 

Warner’s analysis becomes important in more contexts than sexuality, and can be extended to all norms generally. This becomes important when Warner argues that on the level of desire and motivation as causes of behaviour; everyone wants to be normal. If the alternative is being labeled as abnormal, deviant or “not being one of the rest of us” (53), there seems to be little reason why people would be motivated not to behave in a way that is deemed as normal. For example, in the case of sexuality in the contemporary moment, “sexuality is too distorted by moralism to be an accurate picture of normal behaviour” (Warner paraphrasing Alfred Kinsey, 55) (see [[Pleasure]] ). First, this moralism around sexuality and what constitutes as normal did not really become important until the nineteenth century and the spread of statistics (53) (similar to Canguilhem's argument about measured averages). And second, interestingly, what was rarely considered was if some of the norms being perpetuated involved negative truisms about human behaviour, why would people want to be normal (54)? In simple terms, the value placed on being normal is higher than the value of what normal constitutes, if people are willing to desire being part of any norm even if they are negative (like having bad breath for example). So, if the general mentality is that being a homosexual, for example, is equal to being abnormal, there is enough shame created to shape the behaviour of a group and reinforce the feeling that they should strive to be different (60).

In conclusion, and keeping with Warner’s line of thought, if being fully normal is impossible, but it is what individuals desire, resistance to norms may lie in a shift in awareness and criticism. With the ordinary use of the word “norm” comes confusion between statistical norms and evaluative norms (56). The evaluative norm - as a standard that becomes a goal to be achieved - is what is of concern here, and if “people mistakenly suppose that the statistical norm must reveal the standard of healthy sexuality” (56), then why would this not apply to other parts of identity (see [[Identity]] )? There is a possibility that norms could shape individual opinions and behaviour less if the concept of worth was considered. We use worth to judge value, so when we judge our own worth we think our assessment is accurate, when in reality is it getting continually shaped by norms. Being aware of this influence may be the key to existing outside of normative structures. 

Works Cited

Canguilhem, Georges. _On the Normal and the Pathological_. Zone Books, 2007.

Foucault, Michel. _The History of Sexuality: An Introduction, Volume I_. Random House Inc., 1978.

Foucault, Michel. _Discipline & punish: The Birth of the Prison_. Random House Inc., 1977.

Warner, Michael. _The Trouble with Normal: Sex, Politics, and the Ethics of Queer life_. Harvard University Press, 2000.

