## Panopticism: Big Brother is always watching (you)
**Written by Adara Reid**

>Internal Navigation:
* [What is a Panopticon?](#what-is-a-panopticon?)
* [Power in Social Media Anxieties](#power-in-social-media-anxieties)
* [The Individual Within the Panopticon](#the-individual-within-the-panopticon)
* [The Visible and Unverifiable](#the-visible-and-unverifiable)
* [The Individual Becomes Aware](#the-individual-becomes-aware)
* [Resources](#resources)

### What is a Panopticon?

Imagine a society in which a form of punishment and control could exist in full “perfection”. Imagine a society in which this form of punishment was, while in the process of being enacted upon its residents, entirely invisible and undetectable on the surface to those who are at the mercy of it. Now, imagine a society in which the *public* and the *[[population|Population]]* become completely aware of this power looming ominously above their heads and, in so doing, simultaneously deny its existence and strengthen its power and hold over them.

This is the very society we live in. Furthermore, this is the very type of society as theorized by Michel Foucault, based upon Jeremy Bentham’s theories of panopticon. Foucault, drawing from Bentham, realizes and produces his own theories on the operational function of the panoptic outline as it operated within his contemporaneous society. In realizing his own theories on panoptic control and how it can operate within society, Foucault turns to Bentham’s architectural phenomenon of the prison Panopticon. Bentham pontificates in the late 18th century of a prison system that would, in theory, be the “perfect” form of [[disciplinary control|Discipline]]. As Foucault describes it, “At the periphery, an annular building; at the centre, a tower; this tower is pierced with wide windows that open onto the inner side of the ring; the peripheric building is divided into cells, each of which extends the whole width of the building; they have two windows, one inside, corresponding to the windows of the tower; the other, on the outside, allows the light to cross the cell from one end to the other.” (200) Although such a building was never realized, Bentham’s theories did come to fruition in due time.

Foucault, in his monograph “Discipline and Punish” goes into Bentham’s theories of the Panopticon at some length. Rather than taking Bentham’s concepts and applying them to a material invention, Foucault examines these theories not only as a metaphor for a new disciplinary society, but also as a sign of it, “The celebrated, transparent, circular cage, with its high tower, powerful and knowing, may have been for Bentham a project of a perfect disciplinary institution; but he also et out to show how one may ‘unlock’ the disciplines and get them to function in a diffused, multiple, polyvalent way throughout the whole social body. … It programmes, at the level of an elementary and easily transferable mechanism, the basic functioning of a society penetrated through and through with disciplinary mechanisms.” (208-9) In short, the panopticon is a form of power that not only displays itself automatically and continuously, (it is self-creating and sustaining, which we will come to later on), but it is also a form of power that lies in a material presence that manifests in a constraint of power in which you have the possibility of being both the observer and the observed. (Zuboff)

### Power in Social Media Anxieties

Consider what happens every time you open the social media platform Facebook. To start, it is very likely the act of “logging in” is removed entirely from your daily routine; most platform users maintain a status of online-ready and easy access by virtually never logging out of their accounts, so as to have the social world always present at their fingertips. Immediately, this act of not logging off and therefor never logging in creates a power dynamic between you and the application; you gain the power of the voyeur while simultaneously being the victim of millions of other people who possess that same power – meanwhile, the corporation of Facebook gains constant traffic and a series of networks through which information is continuously passing. But what happens after you open Facebook? Perhaps you scroll through your “feed” to see what your friends and family are up to. Maybe you’re checking your messages or notifications. Or maybe you’re clicking on an old beaux so you can find the profile of their new fling. In this latter action, you may be engaging in the socially constructed act of “Facebook Stalking” wherein you glean information about an individual solely on the open information provided in their self-created profile on the very website you project your own personal information on. You gain the power of knowledge, and a dynamic begins to emerge; you are enacting a gaze upon another individual without their knowledge of it, however simultaneously it is not impossible that that very individual, or someone else entirely, is enacting their own gaze on your profile without your knowledge. To combat this, you may have your privacy settings set securely, or you may refrain from posting anything to your page that is too incriminating, embarrassing, or personal so as to not give anyone any full view of who you are and what you’re doing. This is how the panopticon works; you are forced into a certain idyllic action in relation to your own life and experiences based on what might be happening beyond your knowledge. You will never know if someone is “Facebook Stalking” you, but you take action against it, and its repercussions, anyway.

Furthermore, beyond even the social implications of your peers looking into your personal information, there is a societal fear of observation from figures such as future employers. There is a saying that goes, “the Internet is forever,” and every user, whether subconsciously or consciously, is aware of this fact and acting against it every opportunity they gain. An individual who is even mildly aware that what they post to Facebook may prove harmful to a future employment opportunity will refrain from doing so; this act of self policing and keeping your own network clean in the potential event of another individual taking a peek into your life is the panopticon at work, “He who is subjected to a field of visibility, and who knows it, assumes responsibility for the constraints of power; he makes them play spontaneously upon himself; he inscribes in himself the power relation in which he simultaneously plays both roles; he becomes the principle of his own subjection.” (Foucault, 202-3) 

Although social media platforms such as Facebook do allow you to control and monitor your own privacy settings, these settings are tactfully hidden within drop-down menus and redirecting links. The act of privatizing your own information and protecting it from the prying eyes of an outside voyeur is made more difficult through Facebook’s own actions against you finding the power to do so. Facebook here is enacting upon you their own form of micro-panopticon: without saying or directly doing anything against you, the platform automatically pigeonholes you into a state of vulnerability through the design of its website and application.

### The Individual Within the Panopticon

It is through a system of society that we find the true power of the Panopticon. The system ultimately operates as a form of abstract over society; the tower does not exist on our horizons like a silent sentry, ensuring our behavior on a day to day basis. Its existence, though not material, is contingent on the continued existence and exhibition of the “public” and the “self”. It is here that we get the establishment of societal [[norms|Norm]]. A system of control which is always watching automatically creates and enforces a system of status-quo; interrupt it, and the punishment may be severe (imprisonment, death) or mild (banishment from the “cool” table of the cafeteria in high school because you wore pink on the wrong day), but regardless of the level of infraction committed, the punishment does exist and it is enacted upon an [[individual body|In(dividual)]]. 

Without the concept of the “public” and the “self”, the construct of the panopticon begins to unravel – it would become not only irrelevant, but entirely non-existent. It is through the creation of a “self” within an individual where the panopticon can exhibit its full form of power. Without a set of psychological motivation and choice, there is no reason to exact control or discipline over any one body. However, through its very existence, the panopticon creates the concept of the “self” while simultaneously enforcing it upon the population. This is done through the implication of the norm and the “law”. Although the power poses as operational upon a collective whole (society, the world) it is only effective on a micro level as the individual enforces the ideology of the system upon themselves. This manifests as a form of self-policing, in which the panopticon through its own action upon the individual, forces the individual to sustain the system. 

### The Visible and Unverifiable

It is here that the concept of power, of [[surveillance|Surveillance]], is inverted upon the individual. Again, while engaging in an active position of voyeur, one is simultaneously identifying with the subject of another voyeur. Here, we come in contact with the theories of the ‘visible’ and ‘unverifiable’, “Bentham laid down the principle that power should be visible and unverifiable. Visible: the inmate will constantly have before his eyes the tall outline of the central tower from which he is spied upon. Unverifiable: the inmate must never know whether he is being looked at at any one moment; but he must be sure that he may always be so.” (Foucault, 201) It is easy to imagine the “visible” panopticon as the monetary economy of today’s society (especially so in Western culture) however this economy also manages to manifest in the material nature of our day to day lives. Consider surveillance technologies – security cameras, video monitors; every time you step out in public, you are being photographed and recorded from several different angles. It becomes virtually impossible to hide from the ever-present eye of a camera, even in the comfort of your own home where, due to technological innovations of the past decades, we now host our own cameras within the devices we use daily: computers, phones, tablets, etc. The apparatus of the camera itself is a visible form of the panopticon, and through its implication within our daily lives begins to create the concept of a “visual economy”: an economy which can not only be perceived, but also interacted with on an individual basis. Jonathan Beller, a film theorist and cultural critic of today, refers to this as “culture as a mode of production” in relation to the media technologies of film, television, [[games|Play]], etc. Culture, however, becomes a mode of production within the effacement of the individual and the reconstruction of the self through the enforcement of the panopticon. 

This action taken upon us, however, is entirely unverifiable and manifests as a form of self-mutilation. As discussed previously, this is done through the act of self-policing; an act which often occurs without the individual’s knowledge. The presence of a camera does not promise the presence of an observer, just as the presence of the tower does not promise supervision of the inmates at all times. A voyeur may tap into technological apparatuses at any moment, and it is this fear, that we may be observed at any moment, that forces us into place. “If this production of both value and commodity-self (as worker, as consumer, as fecund perceiver) through looking is indeed the case then the emergence of visual culture must be set in relation to the development and intensification of commodity fetishism.” (Beller) Fetishisation of the unverifiable observer begins as a mode of conversation; between individuals, an uncovering of “schemes” of surveillance and techniques of knowledge collection provides a window into the otherwise invisible world of control that surrounds us. There is a question, however, of how useful this “conversation” might actually be.

Conduct an experiment. Gather a group of your peers into one room and ask them if they are aware that they are under surveillance at any given time during an average day. Follow that question up with a second: do you care? Chances are, most of them will say no. To those who say yes, they do care, ask them what they will do about it. The answer will, more often than not, be “nothing.” 

We know that we are being constantly watched, but this knowledge does not permeate or dictate our day-to-day lives (for the most part), so within this collapse of the system upon the individual, we also see an enforcement of the power. The unconscious conformity to the system is full evidence of the system working. We obey laws subconsciously and offenders are punished for their actions in one way or another and then we go on with our days. The fact that we are constantly being watched may not affect us in a present mental state, however it does affect us on a subconscious level, and ultimately controls our actions, “Hence the major effect of the Panopticon: to induce in the inmate a state of conscious and permanent visibility that assures the automatic functioning of power.” (Foucault, 201)

### The Individual Becomes Aware 

So, what happens when the individual does become aware of the system of power operating around them?

Attempts are made on a daily basis to conceptualize the panopticon through the outlet of “art”, (I place the term in quotations simply to save myself the pain of having to explain why I referred to the television show *Big Brother* as ‘art’ indirectly later in this section). Art as a form of expression and exploration gives way to a number of opportunities for the individual to figure out their own place within the system. 

In 2015, the Museum of Contemporary Canadian Art hosted a showcase event called Videodrome 2015, at which Hopkins Duffield unveiled their installation *[Panoptidrome](https://hopkinsduffield.com/2017/04/05/documentation-of-panoptidrome/)*, “For the show, we created an audio-video surveillance sculpture named *Panoptidrome*, which tracked the faces of people in the space and created a 3-D scan of them. The scan was then videomapped onto square tiles on the wall.” This installation operated as a physical, material representation of the panoptic “tower”, manifesting in the form of a circular dome glowing an ominous, aggressive red. Ever-watching and ever-mapping, the interactive installation served to highlight how the panoptic system works, without going into so many words. Through a simple act of 3-D graphing and projection onto a screen, the art installation managed to capture the complete essence of the panoptic society. Hopkins Duffield succeeded in their imagining of the material system, pulling spectators in through a conceptually fun and enjoyable interactive experience while simultaneously projecting an implication of malignant operation beneath the surface, (as represented by the glowing red scan/projection, and the sleek mechanical nature of the dome itself – a structure which closely resembles a giant metal eye). 

This installation, however, serves ultimately only as a niche representation of the individual attempting to situate themselves within the panopticon. In a more broad, colloquial sense, we can look to the concept of the “Big Brother” to see how knowledge and exploration of the panopticon has permeated the unconscious society. We are all aware of the Big Brother as discussed in George Orwell’s novel “Nineteen Eighty-Four.” This concept of the big-bad of governmentality has not only integrated into today’s society and colloquialisms, but has also provided the world with a form of reality entertainment. 

“The allure of the panoptic world view is, above all, the promise of certain knowledge based upon the totality of observation it affords.” (Zuboff) This totality of representation is realized beyond theory and brought into the world of the tangible through the television show *Big Brother*. *Big Brother* is a television show that has spanned the networks of several countries since its initial release in the Netherlands in 1999, “Big Brother is developed as a composite media text that is constituted through an application of the entire range of media and ICTs: tv, the internet (official and unofficial love and hate sites), comments, interviews and rumours circulating in print media, on radio programmes and in other tv shows. Much of its content is used on several platforms – particular scenes, often the most juicy ones, are shown on tv (and with multiple repeats) and put on the internet.” (Drotner) The general premise of the show is a group of 16 contestants, or “houseguests”, enter a building that is entirely cut off from the outside world, save for small moments of interaction through heavily monitored video footage and the potential to receive a letter from home if one of the housemates wins what is called the “Head of Household” for the week, (a position which awards them with the power of safety, and of nominating two houseguests for eviction from the house). The houseguests are monitored on a 24/7 basis through cameras that are placed throughout the whole of the building, providing the spectator with complete access to what the houseguests are up to and talking about, (each houseguest is individually mic-ed), without the houseguests’ direct knowledge of any spectator. Of course, in participating in the game, each houseguest is constantly aware of the cameras and their daily lives being projected for the entire world to see, however they cannot see or act against the individuals watching them. This show plays on the idea projected initially by George Orwell that “Big Brother is always watching you.” Through engaging in an act of spectatorship as the television show airs, the individual occupies the position of Big Brother, in some cases even holding the ability to affect the game directly, (this being done through community polls each week.) 

What we have now, then, is a direct representation of the overarching presence of the panoptic system within society. By engaging with cultural phenomena such as the concept of reality television, the individual may actively occupy the form of panoptic control and surveillance. This provides a base and subconscious understanding of how the panopticon works, though not represented by that word directly, and creates in the individual a level of self-awareness that, despite its realization, simultaneously denies its existence. We as individuals undergo micro-changes within ourselves each time we interact indirectly with the concept of the panopticon as presented to us, and it is in this way that the system enforces its power and disciplinary control over our societal culture and norms. 

The Big Brother, however, does not exist even in a conceptual nature. The panopticon cannot be called a ‘Big Brother’, but rather through its individualization of its system within the action of power upon the body, it splits itself into millions of Little Brothers – and it is the actions and power of the Little Brother that you need to be worried about. One power does not exist, one power is not always watching, but one system of multiple powers are.

And remember: there is a difference between “Big Brother is always watching” and “Big Brother is always watching *you*.”

### References

Beller, Jonathan. The Cinematic Mode of Production: Towards a Political Economy of 
	The Postmodern. “Culture, Theory and Critique.” Nov. 9, 2010. Web.

Drotner, Kirsten. New Media, New Options, New Communities. “Towards a Convergent 
	Media and ICT Research.” Plenary Session I. Nordicom. N.d. Web.

Foucault, Michel. “Panopticism.” Discipline & Punish: The Birth of the Prison. S.n.
        Vintage, 2009. Print. 195-228

Hopkins, Daniele & Kyle Duffield. “Documentation of Panoptidrome.” Hopkins Duffield.
	April 5, 2017. Web.

Zuboff, Shoshana. “Chapter Nine: The Information Panopticon.” In The Age of the 
	Smart Machine. New York: Basic Books Inc. 1988. Print.
