## Confession

I faked orgasms for two years. The first time I had sex, it felt magical. It felt like practicing the lesbian identity I had long come to associate myself with. It felt like I was watching myself the way I used to watch the L Word. in my mind I was screaming, “this is magical!” Except, the magic didn’t quite happen. So I faked it. I didn’t know what pleasure was and I didn’t know how it should play into my identity. Am I gay because I like women sexually? If so, why was I not finding sex with them pleasurable? If it was about connection and chemistry, how was it sexual? My confusion went on, and I just went with it. Not embracing it, but I had gotten quite good at faking it, so I continued to fake it with the hope that one day I would make it. 

Eventually I stopped having sex altogether because the confusion was getting overwhelming. Plus, there is always that thought that maybe celibacy might be the way to spirituality after all. I became intrigued with the mystery of pleasure because I figured that for me to enjoy sex, I should probably try to come to term with what I found pleasurable first. It turned out that the question of pleasure was too big of a question to ask. Every time I learned a little more about my experiences of pleasure, it seemed to impact my identity entirely. It was surprising how coming to terms with something that I had long enjoyed and articulating it through language could have such impact.  I felt like the moment I came out of the darkness, it was only to enter boxes. If you are not into vanilla sex, you are kinky. What kind of kinky are you? What are you into? What’s your hard limit? What was supposed to be “behind closed doors” seemed to come to define me more and more in everyday life. But why? No one was defining me but me. Nonetheless, it felt like every move I made, from following a Tumblr thread to selecting a label on Pornhub, or even thinking a thought that had the potential of turning me on, said something about me as a person. 

I have a friend who always jokes about us being men haters. “Not all men”, ugh. But hopefully you know what I mean? What started out as a joke brought me back to when I first found a woman attractive. For the first time I noticed a difference between masculinity and femininity, long before I came across the discourse around gender. I found myself wanting to touch this woman because she was soft, she was gentle, she was viewed as weak but she was strong. I found myself associating people with words like womanhood, and my heart would flutter whenever I described someone as “womanly”. Growing up in a less “progressive” environment, it was hard not to associate men with negative masculinity, and what I associated with womanhood contrasted nicely against the kind of masculinity I came to hate, for lack of a better word. Was my desire to touch her ever associated with pleasure? No, because that was long before I knew what sex was. So what was it? It got to a point where I asked myself: am I gay or am I just a men hater? Did my desire for women come from a place of pleasure, or was it a rebellion against the patriarchy I perceived? More importantly, was I delusional, trying to draw connection between fantasies and an ideology (if you can call it that)?

So two years later, a bit older but not any less confused, I decided to start with small tasks. I started dating again. This time, however, I had the short term goal of not faking an orgasm again because supposedly, once you stop doing something, you kind of know how it influences you, right? So here I am, four years from when I faked my first orgasm. Do I feel any different? Maybe. What do I know about my pleasures? What do I know about what my pleasures say about me? All I can say is, I no longer fake orgasms. Sometimes I stumble across pleasures, sometimes I simply say I’m sorry but I don’t think it’s happening. I found myself falling in love with a woman. The kind of love . I can’t help but think maybe my feeling a visceral love has something to do with not faking orgasms. I guess you could call it good karma, but I’d really like to think that karma isn’t simply a supernatural happening. Now I feel an extra push not to pretend I’m enjoying something when I’m not, because “she deserves to know the real me”. As I was writing this I realized, what I find pleasurable must reflect something about me. Otherwise, why does my honesty in bed have anything to do with her knowing the real me?

In this paper, I will rely on Foucault’s The History of Sexuality Volume 1 and the History of Sexuality 2:Tthe Use of Pleasure, as well as Friendship as a Way of Life, to spell out his understanding of the relationship between pleasure and ethics. I will then experiment with the idea of pleasure-based relationality as alternative to heteronormative monogamy with the aid of Alexis Shotwell’s essay Ethical polyamory, responsibility, and significant otherness. Finally, I will argue that while I do believe pleasure is closely related to our ethical and sexual identity, it is ultimately an individualized experience that a generalization cannot represent fully. I aim to show that owning your pleasure is to acknowledge the way in which pleasure shapes you, as well as its contingency. What we find pleasurable, at the end of the day, should not necessarily be subject to moral discussion. 

## Pleasure and Ethics

Foucault believes that a structure of practice that is productive of ethics is one that should move toward pleasure. 
While ars erotica is concerned with the sensual experience of sex (History Vol 1, 67), scientia sexualis is concerned with the presumably scientific facts about sex. (Refer to Spenser). It is not something to be passed down, but rather drawn out through the act of confession. Foucault implies that confession and its supposedly purifying effect are cultural constructs (History Vol 1, 61-62). We believe that in order to know the truth about ourselves, we must examine within ourselves an “subjugate it at the level of language, controls its free circulation in speech, expunge it from the things that were said, and extinguish the words that rendered (History Vol 1, 17). In order to gain self-mastery, in other words, we believe we must confess. The combination of the tradition of confession and scientific discourse lead us to see sex as something secretive, as well as a field of knowledge from which we can collect data. Foucault holds the constructivist view that the facts about sexual behaviors do not produce truth about us. It is the scientific discourse and the categories we have constructed (contingently) that reflect truths about us. He is opposed to the view that sexual categories preexist in us. Sexuality is not facts to be discovered and distinguished in us objectively. What produces knowledge about us the way we construct the discourse around sexuality to aid our understanding of ethics.  
Foucault criticizes the juridico-discursive conception of power that sees power simply as oppressive. On the one hand, repressive hypothesis that claims that our sexuality is something that has been surprised from the 17th century due to capitalism and that it we must seek sexual liberation. On the other hand, some sees power as the productive force of desire because its oppression makes us aware of the impulses that we are prevented from realizing. In relation to the repressive hypothesis, desire would become a mechanism by which we fulfill the lack we find in ourselves as the result of oppression, and pleasure would become our way of work on and manage the self (e.g. moderation) and produce ethics. Sexuality, then, becomes closely related to identity. 
What’s the point of pleasure? What does it achieve? How is it related to the ascesis ([Ascesis]
(https://github.com/kredati/control-encyclopedia/wiki/Queer#Ascesis))? The problematizations of pleasure, Foucault holds, foster the discourse of sexuality and positions one as a desiring (ethical) subject (Pleasure, 10-11). One’s becoming of an ethical subject is not achieved through any universal principles but rather through individual actions. The Greeks believe that this process involves moderating one’s desires by overcoming passion and listening to reason. It is an “art of existence (Pleasure, 10)” that seeks to transform oneself through regulating one’s conduct.  Medicine, for example, has encouraged “prudence in the use of sexual pleasures (Pleasure, 16)” – to “avoid their untimely enjoyment, take into account the conditions in which they are to be experienced, fear their peculiar violence and the effects of errors of regimen (16).” The management of pleasure gives one means to shape themselves into ethical subjects.
Christianity can be said to have changed the Western view of sexuality from an ethical stance: 
“The meaning of the sexual act itself: it will be said that Christianity associated with evil, sin, the Fall, and death, whereas antiquity invested it with positive symbolic values. Or the definition of the legitimate partner: it would appear that, in contrast to what occurred in the Greek and Roman societies, Christianity drew the line at monogamous marriage and laid down the principle of exclusively procreative ends within that conjugal relationship (Pleasure, 14).” 
Asceticism has been used as the renunciation of pleasure. Self-restraint was said to give one self-mastery and access to spirituality (Pleasure, 20). Foucault criticizes that while asceticism seemed fundamental to Christian or modern European morality, “women are generally subjected to extremely strict constraints, and yet this ethics was not addressed to women… it was an ethics for me (Pleasure, 22). This ethical framework did not spell out rules for both sexes, but rather, it was “an elaboration of masculine conduct carried out from the viewpoint of men in order to give form to their behavior (Pleasure, 23).”

The ascesis Foucault proposes, in particular, queer ascesis, is closely related to our acceptance of pleasure. It is not sexual liberation that has the potential of enabling us to develop a sexual mode that is outside of the heteronormative institution, Foucault reflects, but rather making “ourselves infinitely more susceptible to pleasure (Friendship, 137). Something that we can take up today through not sexual liberation, but “to make ourselves infinitely more susceptible to pleasure (Friendship, 137).” In other words, the non-institutionalized way of transforming oneself into ethical being has a lot to do with embracing pleasures, not suppressing them. 

## Pleasure-based Relationality 

Building on the discussion of S&M [S&M]
(https://github.com/kredati/control-encyclopedia/wiki/Queer#S&M) as an alternative relationality outside of the heteronormative framework, I propose polyamory as another alternative. Foucault, in Friendship as a Way of Life, described queer relationality one as one that is formless and indescribable by institutionalized, heteronormative language like marriage.  The relationship, resembles friendship – “sum of everything through which they can give each other pleasure (Friendship 136).” Foucault has made a strong case for S&M as one of the alternatives. In this section, I will attempt to establish that another interpretation of the friendship Foucault describes would be polyamory.

I propose that a kind of polyamorous relation that focuses on individual pleasure and nourishing can be much less limiting than an institutionalized relationship, and it practice has great ethical potential. My proposal will be benefitting from Alexis Shotwell’s essay Ethical Polyamory and Responsibility. While Shotwell’s essay primarily take individual flourishing as the main focus of her module of polyamory, I will incorporate in her module Foucault’s insistence of the significance of pleasure, and argue that the embrace of pleasure is important to the kind of flourishing Shotwell imagines.   
Shotwell points out that many of the existing terms used in negotiation of polyamorous relationships, for example, “triad”, “quad”, “closed group married”, are “efforts to concretize in language heterodox relational practice (Shotwell, 2).” In other words, while these terms offer a way to ensure ethical practices of polyamory, they also benefit from existing heteronormative logic. Shotwell’s “feminist philosophical accounts of the importance of relationality to self-formation (Shotwell, 2)” coincides with Foucault’s queer ascesis. 

Shotwell criticizes dyadic polyamory, the kind of polyamory that prioritizes primary partners over secondary partners for jeopardizing the wellbeing of secondary partners. This type of polyamory, she claims, is like being on “monogamy steroids (Shotwell, 4).” What she proposes is a new she derives from Sue Campbell’s idea of “relational self-construction (Shotwell, 7). Instead of inaccurately imagining ourselves as “separable, stably-bounded individuals (Shotwell, 7)”, Shotwell encourages us to accept that our identity is formed in relations with others. In responding to others’ behaviour, we are constantly being shaped. We become different beings through being available and “being-in-response (Shotwell, 7).” Instead of identifying a significant other, we could instead recognize “significant otherness”, a term that describes our multiple ambiguous yet affective relationships with multiple parties. What we are, Shotwell elaborates, are “selves shaped in relations of responsibility toward non-reductive otherness (8).” Relationship is contingent, Shotwell claims, and to realize that is scary. It makes us anxious to see our partners having experiences that we cannot be a part of and flourish in ways that are independent of us. But if we see being poly not as the presence of multiple, simultaneous sexual relationships, but an availability to be in relations with others, we could have relationality where we focus on the flourishing of our significant otherness. I elaborate that pleasure would be a main aspect of the flourishing Shotwell has in mind. The relationality where we focus on each other’s wellbeing is inseparable with the pleasure we give and receive. Rid of institution-prescribed obligations, pleasure might very well be the fabric of our enjoyment of each other’s company. Pleasure in this sense does not necessarily derive from sexual activity. In the next part of my essay, I will differentiate between sexual arousal, sexual desire, and pleasure.  

## Pleasure as individualized experience 

Pleasure is a largely individualized experience. Foucault’s belief in its importance for ethical identity is profound but not representative of all experiences. Philosophers have long debated what sexual pleasure entails and what kind of relationship it has to one’s identity.  Rockney Jacobsen’s essay Objects of Desire mapped out two strategies that are commonly used to understand sexual desire – the object-based strategy, and a feature-based strategy.  Object-based strategy views sexual desire through what the desire aims at, while feature-based strategy identifies sexual desire with the quality the objects it aims at possess in common. Philosophers like Thomas Nagel, Jean-Paul Satre, Jacobsen discerns, approach the subject of sexual desire with an object-based strategy because they proposed that “a sexual desire is a desire for sensings of other’s sensings of our sensings of them”, which implies that sexual desire is distinguished by “its aims and objects (Jacobsen, 4)”. He criticizes the object-based strategy for presupposing what “sex” entails (Jacobsen, 7). It is unlikely that we have a universal perception of what objects are sexually arousing.  Jacobsen proposes that we should explain sexual activity in terms of what we find desirable, instead of explain sexual desires in terms of sexual activity. 
He also rejects the belief held by scholars like Alan Goldman that “a sexual desire is a desire for sexual pleasure (Jacobsen, 5)”. While sex can be a source for sexual pleasure, it is not uncommon for people to have sex for other reasons, for example, procreation. Pleasure is often reduced in belief of moderation, as Foucault mentioned. Jacobsen accuses the object-based, and specifically, pleasure-based definition of sexuality of “reducing our lovers to mere instruments for our pleasure”, not on a moral perspective, he explains, but because this definition “misrepresents the role that others play in our desires”. In case of masturbation, for example, we often fantasize about something or someone while pleasuring ourselves. Although it is ourselves that are physically inducing pleasure, we might fantasize that it is someone else. In this case, it is what we fantasize about instead of the pleasurable sensations that is the object of our desire. 
Even a more robust conception of sexual pleasure would not suffice, according to Jacobsen. Some philosophers suggest that we broaden the definition of sexual pleasure to the enjoyment of sex beyond pleasant bodily sensations. Jacobsen argues we would still have to base our definition on a presupposed conception of what being sexual entails, which he has previously established as a mere presumption (Jacobsen, 6). 

Moreover, he observes that desire tends to focus on what we think is desirable and “reflect our preferences or values”. This characteristic of desire he draws out is where his understanding of pleasure comes into play. He rejects the view held by many scholars, for example, Alan Goldman, that pleasure is the end goal of sexual activities. He considers pleasure one of the many features that we potentially use to rationalize our desire. Pleasure, he claims, is not something that makes a sexual act sexual. Nor is it a reflection of our values, but rather, a feature of the object of our sexual desire, which helps us make sense of our desire for it.

Jacobsen proposes a feature-based strategy that does not rely on pleasure to define sexual. He differentiates between the concepts of sexual arousal and sexual desire. He describes sexual arousal as something that resembles an itch, “an objectless bodily state that naturally gives rise to a desire to do something about it”. It is something that is distinct from desire but “deeply implicated in some of the desires we do have (Jacobsen, 7)”. He describes sexual desire as “desires to produce states of sexual arousal, desires to sustain or continue a state of sexual arousal, and desires to heightens states of arousal (Jacobsen,8).” Simply put, his strategy is one that is based in what individuals find arousing. What we find arousing is what is sexually desirable for us. This definition of sexual desire, he insists, does not limit objects of desire and allows us to define sexual individually. The effects of intensifying or releasing our arousal have effects that are pleasurable, but the effects are sexual because they are related to states of arousal, not because they are pleasurable. Pleasure, in Jacobsen’s account, is a byproduct of effects on states of arousals that does not produce any knowledge about the self. If pleasure is contingent, as Jacobsen suggests, it seems like it would not be an indication of our ethics, and therefore should not necessarily be subject to the kind of ethical discussion that centres pleasure. 

## Conclusion
The embrace of pleasure, I conclude, has the potential of enabling us to form identity without institutionalized language. My confusion about pleasure seemed to stem from the lack of such language and the intuition that somewhere deep inside the realm of pleasure, there is a hidden identity that defines me.  Given its fluid and contingent nature, however, I came to believe that pleasure itself does not define us. It is the way we discuss it and the discourse we build around it that reflects truth about us – much like the way Foucault views the discourse around sexuality. It seemed to me that it was not the pleasures I felt, or the lack thereof, that generated truth about me, but the length I went through to be truthful about how I felt. It was through this exploration that my identity formed. It seemed that what makes one gay was not the concern here. Sexual identity, I realized, is more likely to form in the confusion and ambiguity that comes with foregrounding pleasure. 
