## Confession

Queerness is a slippery subject. Ambiguity and strangeness are written into its very definition. This is why I don't quite know where to start. So, I'll begin with my own introduction to it.

As far as I can remember, my identity has always been fluid. I have never been consistent with my appearance, taste, or hobbies. This has often perplexed – and I think continues to perplex – those around me. My drive to explore and experiment is often mistaken for identity confusion. But aside from the normal amount of confusion and terror involved in growing up, I think I've always been pretty secure in my identity. I have always been self-aware enough to know that experimentation and change are integral to my happiness. My experience with gender and sexuality is the same, but with more guilt. Fluid sexuality and gender identity are confusing to the rigid binaries which structure our society because they pose the problem of unintelligibility. For example, no one questioned my sudden decision to take up the harp, but when I started dressing and acting like a boy (to the extent that I was read as a boy), this thoroughly confused those around me. It was even more confusing to people when, around five years later, I impulsively bought a bright pink jacket and flipped to the other extreme. Likewise, when I started dating a woman after having two long-term relationships with men, I was dismissed as "straight but experimenting". I wasn't gay enough for my gay friends, but I certainly didn't feel straight. Because I have never fit perfectly into any category, or rather, because I couldn't stay put in any category for long enough, I was perceived as being lost.

Fast-forward ten years: I am still just as consistent in my inconsistency, but thankfully now I feel far more comfortable and accepted in that. This is largely due to the introduction of queer politics into my friend circle. Then, when a close family friend introduced me to queer theory, I finally felt able to express my experience. On a more practical level, queer is an ambiguous word that I can throw at people which allows me to avoid being labelled with regard to my gender and sexuality. "Queer" creates the puff of smoke that allows me to escape my interrogator. But queerness can function in a completely different way for other people – and that's the beauty of it. In this essay, I will explore Michel Foucault's conception of queer sexuality through an explication of _The Gay Interviews_.

## Queerness in Foucault

It is important to keep two things in mind when reading for news about queerness in Foucault. 1) Foucault's notion of homosexuality is distinct from what what one might call homosexuality today. In contemporary Western society, homosexuality has largely been absorbed into normative heterosexual culture – queer scholars refer to this phenomenon as homonormativity. For Foucault, homosexuality – or at least his ideal of homosexuality – is far more radical, fluid, indefinite, and anti-identitarian. Thus, Foucault's conception of "gay" is closer in meaning to "queer". Since these two terms are roughly equivalent, I will be using them interchangeably. However, there are some key differences, such as Foucault's focus on gay male sexuality as the prototype for queerness. 2) Queerness has evolved, expanded, and become much more complex since Foucault's time. Thus, although Foucault's work is crucial and foundational, one must keep in mind that he is not the only voice in queer discourse.

I will begin by focusing my attention on two of _The Gay Interviews_ – _Sex, Power, and the Politics of Identity_ (1982) and _Friendship as a Way of Life_ (1981). These interviews took place at the very end of Foucault's career, and therefore provide excellent summaries of his work. Using these texts, I will attempt to unpack Foucault's notion of queerness, specifically looking at how ascesis, pleasure, and identity intersect with this concept. In addition, I explore how queerness can be a form of resistance through the rejection of intelligible categories and the proliferation of non-normative relations. In order to demonstrate this more concretely, I will take sadomasochism as a case study for non-normative relationality. Finally, I will offer a critique of Foucault's conception of queerness in order to locate his blind spots.

### Ascesis

Foucault argues that queer sexuality is a state of "becoming": "we have to work at becoming homosexuals and not be obstinate in recognizing that we are" (Friendship 136). By using the word "becoming", Foucault insinuates that queer sexuality is not a fixed identity category, but a process without an end (Sex 163). To "identify" as queer is not to identify with a label – it is to participate in the mode of life where one perpetually seeks new forms of relations that lie outside the realm of heteronormativity and homonormativity (see Norm). According to Foucault, the queer mode of life is "a way of life that can be shared among individuals of different age, status, and social activity. It can yield intense relations not resembling those that are institutionalized. It seems to me that a way of life can yield a culture and an ethics" (Friendship 138). This mode of life entails the _construction_ of one's desires rather than the discovery of one's desires (Sex 163). That is to say, Foucault resists the psychoanalytic notion that desire is rooted in deeply repressed experiences and urges; instead, Foucault proposes a model where one creates one's own desires through experimenting with different pleasures (Sex 165). In this process of creation and experimentation, individuals "face each other without terms or convenient words, with nothing to assure them about the meaning of the movement that carries them toward each other. They have to invent, from A to Z, a relationship that is still formless" (Friendship 136). For Fouault, queerness exists in this formless space – it never assumes a solid, definite shape. To be gay is to be attracted to the same sex, whereas to be queer is to allow oneself to have ambiguous feelings and relations which exist outside of our sexual and social vocabulary. Foucault argues that to sustain this mode of life, one must constantly be striving for ascesis. By this he does not mean asceticism, or the renunciation of pleasure – ascesis is, in fact, the elaboration of pleasure (Friendship 137). It is the process of self-transformation which helps one recognize what is pleasurable and map out one's desires in areas which cannot be controlled by structures of power (Friendship 137). (See Power). One could view ascesis as the queer alchemy of the self – it is the (unattainable) goal of transforming of one's subject position into a liberated, titillated, free-floating queer body. (See Subject)

### Pleasure

Foucault is careful not to conflate sexuality, desire, and pleasure – each of these terms have very different implications for queer sexuality. Foucault positions sex as the antithesis to queer pleasure. For Foucault, sexuality is a technology of power designed to control subjects. Sexuality controls individuals in a twofold manner – it mediates one's identity both as an individual and as a member of a population (History 145). This control occurs through transforming individuals into subjects – that is to say, individuals are manipulated into defining themselves in relation to sexuality (See Sexuality). He argues that control can be avoided, if only briefly, by the creation and re-creation of "polymorphous sexualites" (History 105). Polymorphous sexualities refers to the queer ideal of a sexuality that is evolving and expanding, thereby escaping categorization. (Bersani Foucault's rejection of sexuality as what created a new notion of sexuality)

Foucault names "eating, drinking, and fucking" as the only accepted forms of bodily pleasure in our society, and argues that we should strive to expand this unfortunately limited list (Sex 165). He goes on to say: "for centuries people generally, as well as doctors, psychiatrists, and even liberation movements, have always spoken about desire, and never about pleasure. 'We have to liberate our desire,' they say. No! We have to create new pleasure. And then maybe desire will follow" (Sex 166). Clearly, Foucault prioritizes pleasure over desire. This is because desire is more susceptible to control – desire is the map to what we (may) find pleasurable, whereas pleasure is simply that which is pleasurble. In other words, it is easier for institutions of power to tell us what we want than it is for them to tell us what we enjoy. Thus, Foucault encourages us to strive for pleasure rather than desire in order to minimize the degree to which our sexuality is controlled by structures of power (Sex 166).

### Identity

Foucault argues that one should experiment with new forms of pleasure in order to expand one's desires. In the process of doing so, he claims that one may be able to find pleasures which exist outside normative sexual practices, and by extension, discover new forms of relationality. Foucault suggests that through living out new forms of relationality, one may become incomprehensible to structures of power. That is to say, queerness causes one's sexual identity to turn into an anti-identity which thereby challenges subjugation. Foucault admits that subjugation cannot be avoided entirely, but suggests that queerness has the potential to at least hinder it. He explains: "There are always possibilities of changing the situation. We cannot jump outside the situation, and there is no point where you are free from all power relations. But you can always change it" (Sex 167). Since sexuality is situated at the pivot between individual and population, queerness is an attempt to renegociate power relations at both of these levels. The queer mode of life is based on perpetual transformation at the individual level, therefore making one unpredictable at the level of population. Thus, Foucault argues that through the creation and re-creation of one's desires, as well as the perpetual revision of the self through ascesis, queerness holds the potential for resistance. Ultimately, the project of queerness is to dissolve identity and be politically resistant in doing so. 

## S&M

In order to illustrate a non-normative form of relationality in a tangible way, I will use S&M as a case study. Foucault argues that S&M is a creative process that has nothing to do with "the disclosure or uncovering of S&M tendencies deep within our unconscious", but rather, is "the real creation of new possibilities of pleasure, which people had no idea about previously (Sex 165). He goes on to say: "the idea that S&M is related to a deep violence, that S&M practice is a way of liberating this violence, this aggression, is stupid" (Sex 165). Thus, Foucault makes it clear that he is against the idea of S&M being rooted in unconscious impulses. He argues that S&M arises out of a creative impulse – the same impulse which is at the heart of queerness.

Foucault argues that S&M pushes the bounderies of sexuality by using "every part of the body as a sexual instrument" (Sexual 152). In other words, S&M diffuses pleasure across the entirety of the body as opposed to being concentrated strictly in the genital area. Foucault speaks of S&M as the invention of new possibilities of pleasure "through the eroticization of the body" (Sex 165) He suggests that through expanding our idea of sexual pleasure to encompass the entirety of the body, S&M robs the sexual organs of their significance as the most privileged tool for creating sexual pleasure. Thus, through the creation of sexual pleasure that extends beyond the genitals, S&M acts as the "desexualization of pleasure" (Sex 165). Through extending sexual pleasure beyond the genitals, and through introducing "a perpetual uncertainty, which the simple consummation of the act lacks", Foucault claims S&M is grounded in queer ideals (Sexual 152).	

## Critique

Foucault's work is nothing short of canonical in queer discourse – however, there is always room for critique. The main issue that I would like to raise is the impossibility of living out his idea of the queer mode of life in actuality. In many ways, Foucault outlines in very concrete terms how his theories manifest in our culture; unlike many scholars, Foucault is known for his concern for practical implications. But despite his efforts, his idea of the queer mode of life seems near impossible to enact. I will argue that this is primarily the result of a lack of inclusivity. 

Foucault's idea that unintelligibility can be a form of resistance works well in theory, but when it comes to living this out in reality, there are a number of issues he is blind to. The problem with unintelligibility is that in some cases, it can invite violence. This is where intersectionality needs to be taken into account. Foucault assumes the prototype of queerness to be the gay (white) male. One's ability to live out a radical mode of life hinges on privilege; gay white men, for example, naturally have more privilege than a trans person of colour. Therefore, it is more important as a trans woman of colour to have your identity acknowledged by institutions of power, because to have your identity acknowledged is to also be protected, to some degree, by those institutions. Therefore, one must take into account that certain people cannot afford to be unintelligible to institutions of power, while for others, it is less consequential.