## I: Foucault on Race

In his seminal text _The History of Sexuality (Volume 1)_, historian and philosopher Michel Foucault makes rather glib references to racism, writing that the nineteenth century, insofar as it cued the entrance of a biopolitical state, gave rise to the conditions for racism to “take shape” (149). The increasing medicalization and institutionalization of sexual practices figured an urge for “hygienic necessity” and “moral cleanliness of the social body,” which came to “justif[y] the racisms of the state, which at the time were on the horizon” (54). For Foucault, it seems that racism and racialization were tangential to his interest in the history of biopower and biopolitics – certainly, his descriptions in _History_ leave one feeling dissatisfied. It is as though Foucault considers racism as a technique historically contingent and produced, waiting to be born through its deployment in the channels of biopolitics. However, the lectures Foucault gave at the Collège de France at around the same time as History’s publication provide more insight into his logic. Compiled in a book titled _Society Must Be Defended_, the lectures in fact continue the work of historicizing racial struggle, though they provide the context in which Foucault can declare his claim of racism’s emergence. In these lectures, Foucault traces the _historical discourse_ of race struggle from the Middle Ages to sovereign times, and assesses them against each other (Society ch. 4). He writes further, “‘race’ itself is not pinned to a stable biological meaning … Ultimately, it designates a certain historico-political divide” (_Society_ 77). For Foucault, the “race struggle” of say, the Roman empire or sovereign England produced _counterhistorical_ discourses that were generative and provided new knowledges and possibilities for resistance (76-80). By contrast, the biological state racism born of the nineteenth century is one deeply entrenched in institutional forms, and as a result, is observed in the various strategies deployed by the state and onto populations unilaterally. Foucault suggests that Nazism is a salient example of this biological racism taking shape: “Nazism was … able to reuse a whole popular, almost medieval, mythology that allowed State racism to function within an ideologico-mythical landscape” (82). That is, while Foucault argues that Nazism belongs in the domain of the emergent biopolitical racism, he also notes that it co-opted the mythic discourses of race struggle of the sovereign era. Perhaps unwittingly, Foucault thus situates the new racism within a “legend of warring races” (82), which complicates his periodization. 
For all that Foucault has expounded about race, he attends to few of our questions, and still leaves many unanswered. Ann Laura Stoler provides some insight in her book, _Race and the Education of Desire_, in both interrogating and elaborating on Foucault’s explication by turning to his analysis as the grounds for her study of the Dutch Caribbean, wherein discourses of hygiene, sexuality, medicine, pedagogy “were implicitly raced” (Stoler 11). Stoler unsettles Foucault’s proposition of a non-biological racism that was succeeded by a biological one in the nineteenth century. Stoler interprets Foucault’s treatment of race in _The History of Sexuality_ as an analysis on “how a discourse of sexuality articulates and eventually incorporates a racist logic” rather than being explicitly of or about it (Stoler 22). For Foucault, racism functioned as and was produced as a technology of biopower: “[i]t is this new “technology of power centred on life” that produces a normalizing society and a new form of racism inscribed within it” (Stoler 33). She further notes that “an implicit racial grammar underwrote the sexual regimes of bourgeois culture in more ways than Foucault explored” (12). She illuminates the way in which Foucault overlooks how technologies of power informed racialization in earlier colonial contexts, and how these technologies hinged precisely on the “administration of bodies and the calculated management of life” (_History_ 140), or functions of _biopower_.
	While Ann Laura Stoler disrupts Foucault’s historicizing by locating the reaches of biopower in earlier examples of colonial administration, I am more interested in establishing how such histories directly inform the anatomy of racism in the present. My goal is to contribute to the story of racism’s enduring legacy, turning to Ta-Nehisi Coates’ exceptional essay in _The Atlantic_, “The Case for Reparations,” to articulate the situation of the water crisis in Flint, MI. My interest in Flint is rooted in an urgency to spotlight the racism couched in institutional matters of public health and governing livelihood. This account relies on the narrative of inheritance taken up in Coates’ essay – that the configuration of racism and the systemic violence enacted upon the black body in America may have found its origins with the transatlantic slave trade, but continue to thrive today in more insidious forms. This paper vaguely gestures towards readers (such as myself) who are interested in how racism operates in the contemporary moment, and how Foucault’s appreciation for the historical may allow modern readers to found more usable forms of history – in the hopes that history may attend to the present insofar as it contains the past.

## H


In his essay, Ta-Nehisi Coates recounts the story of slavery in America as bound to its exigencies of exploitation, violence, and degradation. He localizes his account through Clyde Ross who, through his involvement with the Contract Buyers League, fought to hold liable the institutional and structural obstacles that not only barred black people from proper home ownership, but made profit on their disadvantage through block-busting and selling on contract. Block-busting was a practice taken up by speculators to theatricalize an increasingly “black neighbourhood” to scare white homeowners into selling for rock-bottom prices. These speculators would then oversell these properties “on contract,” imposing a strict mortgage payment regime on the buyer who would acquire no equity in the meantime. With no legitimate mortgage, black homeowners could not enjoy the new insurance policies offered by the Federal Housing Administration in 1934. The FHA came to adopt a system of maps that signalled which neighbourhoods were in high demand, rated A, and “as one appraiser put it, lacked a ‘single foreigner or Negro’” (“The Case”). At the spectrum’s opposite end, areas rated “D” were predominantly black neighbourhoods. In the mass 20th century exodus of black folks from the South, flourishing cities like Clyde Ross’ home of Chicago were thus deeply segregated into white and black class structures, where those of the latter were pushed and redlined into the cities’ most under-served and undesirable areas. Coates accounts for his telling of redlining by pulling it into the history of America’s sustained exploitation and oppression of black people. After the Emancipation Proclamation, blacks were still the targets of discriminatory crimes and undue punishment: “Eric Foner recounts incidents of black people being attacked for not removing their hats … for ‘using insolent language’; for disputing labor contracts; for refusing to be ‘tied like a slave’” (“The Case”). For Coates, the continued discrimination against black people into the 20th and 21st centuries is indelibly tied to a legacy of slavery and systemic subjugation. Though the racism Clyde Ross and his cohort faced did not bear the verdict of America’s great historical shame, redlining in practice and effect worked to marginalize black people, divest them of liberties granted to whites, and chasten them into feeling responsible for their plight. In effect, redlining inherited from its history the regulation of black people’s bodies, livelihoods and affects. To be clear, I am not suggesting that Foucault’s _biological state racism_ is a model that may be protracted deep into American history. The distinction between _biopower _and _biopolitics_ here is instructive. I think the form of power – _biopower_ – that “foster[ed] life or disallow[ed] it to the point of death” (_History_ 138) has impressions in this historical moment, and that _biopolitics_ is perhaps too limited a metric to impose in understanding state racism, as put forth by Foucault. Indeed, biopower and its coincident biopolitics arose out of specific and historically-contingent apparatuses – the emergence of demography and psychiatry as disciplines occurred in the nineteenth century (_History_ 140), which authorized further production of technological offshoots of biopolitics in governing populations. The notion of possessing and regulating masses of black bodies from life until death is illustrative of Foucault’s _biopower_, and evocative of his _biopolitics_, though I appreciate that the latter is fettered to the history that produced it.

## H


Considering all this, we inevitably return to this pressing question: why does Foucault believe state racism was born in the nineteenth century? Coates addresses this indirectly in his essay: “[w]e believe white dominance to be a fact of the inert past, a delinquent debt that can be made to disappear if only we don’t look.” Debt recapitulates the theme of inheritance, a nation’s accumulated and unchecked charges that tip the scales against African-Americans. Foucault’s model does not disavow or misapprehend this version of history, but rather fails to account for its features entirely. Rights, protections from the crown, and all other trappings of citizenship, like property ownership and martial union, were utterly denied to the enslaved Africans brought to the Americas in the seventeenth century. The logic of democracy upon which the United States was first founded made it such that the governance and administration of bodies were very much matters of the state. The development of a biological racism then finds its roots much sooner than the nineteenth century, as Foucault prescribes. Policy that inscribes biological technologies, concerned with the management of life until death, had betrayed African-Americans since its inception in the American constitution:
> In 1650, Virginia mandated that “all persons except Negroes” were to carry arms. In 1664, Maryland mandated that any Englishwoman who married a slave must live as a slave of her husband’s master. In 1705, the Virginia assembly passed a law allowing for the dismemberment of unruly slaves—but forbidding masters from whipping “a Christian white servant naked, without an order from a justice of the peace.” (“The Case”) 


The crown from which explorers and merchants of the New World had escaped was conspicuously absent in America’s early political and social formations. Perhaps then we can say that the succession of a sovereign era by a disciplinary era, as posited by Foucault, arrives much earlier in North America than it does in Europe. That said, I am cognizant of the specific cultural and historical position from which Foucault writes, one that is entrenched in a Eurocentric perspective and has little indication of desiring to account for much beyond that scope. Considering slavery’s exceptional history in America, Foucault’s single appreciation for racism as an axis of biopower could not conceivably reckon with its entirety. Black bodies circulated throughout the marketplace, and were themselves embodying monetary circulation in their sale. This economization of slaves supplied the wealth of the nation and sustained the growing American economy predicated on maximum exploitation for maximum profit (“The Case”). There is little to be said for this in Foucault’s definitions of biopower and politics. However, much can be said about Foucault’s myopia regarding Europe’s, particularly his native France’s, hand in the colonization, enslavement and oppression of black bodies in a long-recorded history of slave labour and expropriation. Foucault’s oversight here is disappointing.

## H

Still, I find Foucault’s notions of biopower and biopolitics to be generative in understanding racism for our immediate concern – especially in the case of Flint, Michigan, where the state’s task in providing for the essential needs of the population was undermined through a series of injurious administrative decisions. Plundered by 25.7 million dollars of debt, Flint was assigned emergency managers by state Governor Rick Snyder beginning in late 2011 to executively command the city’s affairs. During these next years, Flint’s emergency management discussed the succession of the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, which had been supplying Flint’s water for years, with the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA). Detroit warned Flint of switching providers citing that KWA would be unable to provide the savings it promised and that the decision would raise the costs for the DWSD’s other clients. In April 2013, the city of Detroit issued a statement notifying Flint of a 12-month grace period before the water would be shut off, at which point Flint would have to find an alternative supplier until the KWA could finish reconstruction in 2016. In due time, Flint began using the Flint River as its new water source, about which the Michigan’s Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) stated, “the quality of the water being put out meets all of our drinking water standards, and Flint water is safe to drink” (“How Flint’s water crisis unfolded). Soon, however, Flint residents began to complain of rashes, and of concerns over the water’s bacteria level and yellowing colour. One Flint resident, Lee-Anne Walters, who was pivotal in bringing the water issue to legislators and media alike, called the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to intervene on the murky state of affairs run by state office. Over the next 16 months, both the city and state administrations, as well as the DEQ, kept up the narrative of adequately safe drinking water, and that no additional corrosion control was needed despite [the surfacing evidence showing otherwise](http://flintwaterstudy.org/). Meanwhile, advisories were issued, and studies showed that the lead levels were reaching toxic proportions and were majorly impacting young children and vulnerable demographics. By October 2015, Flint switched back to Detroit pipes contractually, which still has not alleviated the damage done since the switch. Residents are now still reeling from the aftermath and remain [highly suspicious about the quality of the water](http://www.msnbc.com/rachel-maddow/watch/flint-water-crisis-unresolved-after-two-years-715673155777). Today, Virginia Tech’s sustained study on Flint’s water confirmed that the 12 lethal Legionnaires cases in Flint’s county were indeed affected by the months of hazardous water supplied to the city (“Flint water crisis likely the cause”).
	Flint has a population of just under 100,000 – 41% of which lives below the poverty and 56.6% of which is African-American (U.S. Census Bureau). Cases like Flint illuminate how poor, black enclaves – not unlike the one Clyde Ross lived in North Lawndale of Chicago – make up a trend of [environmental racism](http://www.latimes.com/opinion/op-ed/la-oe-0131-highsmith-flint-water-crisis-20160131-story.html), “which for decades has allowed polluters to prey on communities of color, in part because of weak environmental regulations” (“The Racist Roots”). These regulations, in tandem with the many bureaucratic indiscretions over the years, led to fatal results in Flint. The city remains in repair as residents continue the feel [the cognitive and physical effects](http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/31/health/iyw-flint-water-crisis-two-years-later/index.html), as well as [the psychological and emotional effects](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/01/us/flint-michigan-water-crisis-mental-health.html). Even the manual labour involved in scavenging for water, and hauling [10 cases of bottled water a day](http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/31/health/iyw-flint-water-crisis-two-years-later/index.html) becomes taxing, both physically and psychologically. The _Detroit Free Press_ reported that in early 2016, appeals to the Obama administration were made to extend the [enrolment period for Flint residents in light of the water crisis](http://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/flint-water-crisis/2016/01/22/feds-asked-extend-obamacare-deadline-flint/79184080/). 

## V: The Case for Reparations

What Flint illustrates is how the command of state administration on populations absolutely holds stakes in managing one’s life or disallowing it to death. The discourse shared between legislators, media and the residents of Flint throws into relief how administrators were keen on managing the surrounding coverage as much as the situation proper. The crisis makes apparent the effects of ineffective leadership as they are reflected directly in the health of individuals as well as of the population. As Michel Foucault notes in his 1976 lectures, mechanisms of biopolitics, like state-sanctioned illness, “sapped the population’s strength, shortened the working week, wasted energy, and cost money … Death was no longer something that suddenly swooped down on life – as in an epidemic. Death was now something permanent, something that slips into life, perpetually gnaws at it, diminishes it and weakens it” (_Society_ 244). Foucault’s prescient description of the Flint water crisis reveals how biopower and biopolitics indeed inform our current moment, and how its deployment through controlling access to essential goods is, as Ann Laura Stoler puts it, “implicitly raced” (11). Flint’s Congressional Representative Dan Kildee himself admits to _The Huffington Post_ that “[t]here’s a philosophy of government that has been writing these places off — places like Flint get written off … it’s hard for me to accept the fact that race is not the most significant factor” (“The Racist Roots”). Hillary Clinton’s closing remarks at the Democratic primary debate attributed the lacking media coverage and state mobilization over Flint to the city’s high poverty rate and majority African-American population: “if the kids in a rich suburb of Detroit had been drinking contaminated water and being bathed in it, there would've been action” (“How Hillary Clinton”). One _LA Times_ article boasts the headline, “Flint’s toxic water was 50 years in the making,” noting how cities like Flint in America’s Rust Belt were disproportionately affected by poor regulation and corporate interests that targeted undesirable and expendable areas. Thus, housing discrimination and redlining and other politics of racialized geography have produced the conditions for the institutionalization of making live and letting die. 
	Now, we ask: if biological technologies are so prevalent in our contemporary moment, and if Coates correctly assesses these technologies – environmental racism and the access to essential goods vis-à-vis redlining – as contiguous with a centuries-old history, then state racism is as apparent then as it is palpable now. Coates teaches us that we cannot fully appreciate the task we have ahead of us without acknowledging its heritage. He writes, “[a]n America that looks away is ignoring not just the sins of the past but the sins of the present and the certain sins of the future” (“The Case”). In his essay on reparations, Coates makes mention of Congressional bill _H.R. 40: Commission to Study Reparations Proposals for African-Americans Act_ as a starting point for America to turn towards its history fraught with pain, exploitation and divestment. The bill was introduced in 1989 by Congressman John Conyers Jr., and the fact that the bill has yet to proceed onto the House floor points to a harrowing reality of America’s collective resistance towards the restitutive process. However, as the configurations of biopower and biopolitics in Flint indicate, the urgency for such a process lies in the wake of sick, ailing and dead black bodies managed under the scope of a state administration. In order to begin settling the debt, whether in figures or in policy, it must begin with “America’s maturation out of the childhood myth of its innocence into a wisdom worthy of its founders” (“The Case”).   
