By Maywhales

## Confession
When I think of sexuality, it is hard to lock down a specific definition or idea. I convolute it with words and categories I find easier to envision specific terms under, such as sexual orientation, or sexual identity, or even sex itself. Having to dissect how sexuality is used in works by Michel Foucault, Arnold Davidson, Lauren Berlant, and others is jarring in that it clears up the confusion of not knowing what sexuality is, but also raises more questions.

Some of the questions are as follows: How does knowing the history of sexuality affect how sexuality is approached today? According to Foucault, is there a mechanism of control imposed upon me through the way I talk about sex? Are Foucault’s theories on sexuality still relevant today? Is sexuality meant to be confusing?

Of course, sexuality in the contemporary moment benefits from a more liberal, even neoliberal society in that conceptions of the word are less taboo. While the meaning is still confusing, I think there is a general culture of acceptance, openness, yet marketed sexuality. Today, sex sells. I tend to think with sex, sexuality is included in that broad category. Are sexuality and sex really that distinct? While Foucault says so, I still struggled to separate the two from each other. So the reason why this entry does not attempt to make an explicit argument as to what I think sexuality is, I hope that by juxtaposing two accounts of the history of sexuality with two contemporary texts that explicitly talk about sexuality (derived from Foucault), it can serve to answer the aforementioned questions. Moreover, I hope that it will shed some light on what sexuality is and how it stands today.
***
## Introduction
IS THERE A CONCRETE DEFINITION OF SEXUALITY? By this, I do not mean I am looking for a simple answer that neatly categorizes the word into a meaning isolated from its historical context. What I am interested in is finding a definition that clarifies what sexuality is, as a concept that is traceable through history. One possible issue with this endeavour is the obvious problem of how large the scope of sexuality is; it is difficult to extract meaning out of such a broad word without a specific angle. A seminal like Michel Foucault’s _History of Sexuality_ might make it possible to base an understanding of it, but as Foucault died in 1984, this angle alone would be insufficient in connecting his definition to present times. In order to figure out how to tackle this topic, I found it necessary to try to lock down what is and what is not sexuality. Thus, this entry will not argue for a certain, single meaning of sexuality. Rather, it will explore how meanings of sexuality have evolved through history, from the 19th century to the contemporary moment. 

I am interested in two accounts of the history of sexuality: Foucault’s iconic work as well as Arnold Davidson’s _The Emergence of Sexuality_. It is important to note that the latter was influenced by Foucault, though Davidson takes a slightly different spin. Nonetheless, the two works take different approaches outlining the history of sexuality. Foucault’s general argument is that our experience of sexuality is shaped by the discursive element associated with it, or simply how we talk about sexuality. What he focuses on is how techniques of power (specifically biopower) structured the discourse around sexuality to act as a mechanism of a control of individuals and populations.

## Foucault and _The History of Sexuality_
Foucault describes sexuality, first and foremost, as something capable of being influenced and affected by human action, class, and social conventions. (Foucault 3) This means sexuality can change, that sexuality is not static or isolated from other factors; it is capable of being ‘moved’. That is to say, it can occupy a new central space or home environment. Elaborating on his claim that sexuality is mobile, Foucault references the Victorian era, saying “twilight soon fell upon this day, followed by the… Victorian bourgeoisie. Sexuality was carefully confined; it moved into the home. The conjugal family took custody of it and absorbed it into the serious function of reproduction.” (Foucault 3) On the topic of homosexuality, Foucault says “Homosexuality appeared as one of the forms of sexuality when it was transposed from the practice of sodomy onto a kind of interior androgyny, a hermaphrodism of the soul.” (Foucault 43) That is, _sexuality is a form of intangible object able to molded into different forms_ by human forces within a population. But these forms manifested in the ways people talked about it; Foucault stresses that tracing the history of sexuality necessitates, at the same time, tracing the history of discourse along side it. The Victorian bourgeoisie moved sexuality into the home, shrouded it in secrecy and gave it a new form, which involved new ways of talking about it.  Homosexuality became a form of sexuality that could be molded by human forces once it was characterized through the scientific language of psychiatry and psychoanalysis. 

Foucault states that the deployment of the “_Scientia sexualis_”, which means procedures for telling the truth of sex, produced the term “sexuality” to “embody the truth of sex and its pleasures.” (Foucault 68) Foucault outlines how, in the 19th century, sexuality occupied the intersecting space between Christian mechanisms of confession and a growing scientific discourse around the topic. (Foucault 68) Doctors saw sexuality as a mystery that needed to be solved, their anxieties depicted through the belief that it was “by nature: a domain susceptible to pathological processes”. (Foucault 68) It is important to note that since it is a domain susceptible to pathological processes, sexuality was seen as something that is susceptible, or vulnerable to uncontrollable procedures, and thus in ‘need’ of scientific intervention.  
Foucault asserts that his discussion of sexuality is contrary to typical conceptions of its collusion with sex and he affirms that sexuality is not an _ars erotica_; an erotic art where truth derives from pleasure, is a common practice, and fully learned through experience. (Foucault 57) Briefly for clarity, _Scientia sexualis_ and _ars erotica_ are two ways in which sexuality is managed: the former more associated with the West and the latter more associated with the East. (Foucault 57) (Spenser Stewart’s entry on [[Confession]] thoroughly discusses _Scientia sexualis_ and _ars erotica_, so for a better understanding I would check his essay) _Scientia sexualis_ explicitly involves discourse. So, Foucault alleges that sexual pleasure in the West actually derives from the rush one experiences when speaking about it in secret. To justify this claim, Foucault cites examples of confession to Christian priests. In the past, people confessed their ‘sexual sins and deviances’ to be saved by the community leader (the priest). In other words, they told the truth of their sexuality to be able to regulate their conscience and be a good Christian. Foucault notes this as a genital-centric method of organizing populations, which he calls biopower, as well as managing and administering them and their links to each other. (Foucault 36) When the priest tells the sexual deviants to repent and pray for forgiveness, the sinners regulate themselves.

This example separates sex from sexuality, of which Foucault adamantly states that sex is the secret of sexuality, not sexuality itself (Foucault 155). Sex is an imaginary ideal in the deployment of sexuality, allowing sexuality to function by promoting the desire for sex (Foucault 156). The imaginary aspect lies in sexuality’s ability to present sex as desirable (and thus a way of attaining power), when instead it is an illusion that persuades people to think it exists autonomous from sexuality. (Foucault 157) Additionally, Foucault presses hard against the idea that sexuality is a “natural given which power tries to hold in check”, nor “an obscure domain which knowledge tries gradually to uncover.” (Foucault 105) Sexuality cannot be controlled by power, but it also was born from a form of power “that was originally focused on alliance” within the family (think the husband-wife pair). The husband-wife pair signified a kind of truth based on reproduction—the heterosexual pairing—and this alliance reinforced the focus on genitalia focused sexuality (and in the Victorian era, proper sexuality entailed reproduction). Thus, the focus on reproduction through the deployment of alliance reinforced this highly methodical way of organizing and controlling populations. (Foucault 108)

Foucault’s history of sexuality focuses on the subjective, discursive experience of it; on the telling of one’s truth of sex and pleasure. He concludes that through his tracing of the history of sexuality, and the ways it controls society, the way to counter this control is to shift from the fixation on sex and desire to bodies and pleasures. (Foucault 157) Davidson, however, focuses on when sexuality became something relevant to society; when it transformed into a scientific object of study during the 19th century’s obsession with perversion. Specifically, the emergence of sexuality can only be discussed through the story of how perversion emerged as a “disease category”. (Davidson 57)

Davidson and _The Emergence of Sexuality_
Before delving into a history of sexuality, Davidson first outlines how Western psychiatry as a new discipline and emerging practice rose in prominence by the decline of anatomical-clinical medicine. The failure of the anatomical-clinical gaze in identifying mental diseases, disorders, and thus the inability for science to classify these and new diseases marked a shift away from anatomical science. (Davidson 2) Psychiatry could successfully identify these diseases, describing them as deviations or abnormalities, and properly classify them into disease categories. One of these categories were perversions of the “sexual instinct”; ergo, sexual perversions. (Davidson 2) This sexual instinct was explicitly defined in a significant clinical work on perversion by psychiatrist M.P. Legrain, published in 1896, which acknowledged that the sexual instinct was present in every “normal being endowed with life” and wielded genital organs as its instruments. (13) Its “seat was everywhere and nowhere”, which Davidson clarifies its vernacular meaning as it being present in personality. And so, in addition to outlining what the sexual instinct was, Legrain also influenced his audience to look for the diseases of the sexual instinct: in personalities. (13) 

With a nod to Foucault, Davidson says that sexuality started to “individualize” people; it turned one into a kind of human being, of which he puts forth four categories: sadism, masochism, homosexuality, fetishism. (Davidson 63) All of these categories belonged to the same disease: perversion. And so, if perversion was a disease of the personality, sexuality was a way in which the mind was best represented. Essentially, to know a person’s sexuality was a way of knowing a person. It was how a person expressed the individual shape of their personality. So, to understand a person’s sexual deviance was to understand them as a kind of deviant, a kind of person: sadist, masochist, homosexual, fetishist. In explaining this ‘creation of a kind of person’, Davidson cites Ian Hacking’s influential theory called dynamic nominalism. Dynamic nominalism is the shift from the emergence of a concept to the emergence of a kind of person. Hacking argues:

“Categories of people come into existence at the same time as kinds of people come into existence at the same time as kinds of people come into being to fit these categories, and there is a two-way interaction between these processes…history plays an essential role in the constitution of the objects, where the objects are the people and ways in which they behave…[the human sciences] bring into being new categories, which, in part, bring into being new kinds of people.” (Davidson 57)

Dynamic nominalism, then, helps explain how the pervert and the scientific history of perversion brought into being this kind of person at the same time. Similarly, Davidson argues that the way we experience sexuality makes up the essence of sexuality itself, and that this experience was formed through the way sexuality is conceived, scientifically categorized, and reasoned. (Davidson 57) Western 19th century psychiatry equated knowing a person’s sexuality with knowing a person’s hidden personality; to know a person’s sexuality, one had to look for anomalies. (Davidson 63) When influential psychiatrists of the 19th century such as Richard von Krafft-Ebing, Albert Moll, and, of course, Sigmund Freud wrote about these hidden personalities, about perversions of sexual instinct and, subsequently, abnormalities of the human mind, they created working definitions of regular sexuality to contrast with the found irregularities. (Davidson 74-75) While I will not delve into Freud’s psychoanalytic theories of sexuality as that could lead this general entry down a rabbit hole, I will mention that Freud examined every aspect of human activity and human consciousness to locate perversions and understand the human mind: for example, he considered kissing, some kinds of looking, and parent-child relationships as rampant areas of perversion. (Davidson 83). Standard sexuality was whatever what was not an abnormality. 

## Comparing to the contemporary
While these two accounts of the history of sexuality have some fundamental differences in how they go about tracing the history, these conceptions of sexuality offer a good basis for comparison to contemporary scholarship. 

Contemporary writers such as Lauren Berlant and Michael Warner in “Sex in Public” draw upon Foucault’s assertion that sexuality is a domain, but branch off by noting that the appearance of intimacy, that is, “intimate relations of private personhood”, is an illusion within heterosexual culture that prescribes certain values and shames things that go against those values: their focus is on public sex. (Berlant and Warner 192-193) Bluntly, they state that heterosexuality is not a thing, rather, the culture it cultivates is what should be examined. (Berlant and Warner 192) This loosely echoes Davidson’s account, where he argued sexuality only became an object of interest when its deviations, specifically perversion, became areas of interest. Heterosexuality is the norm, and as such, they are more interested in dissecting the culture it propagates. This culture states what is an abnormality compared to heterosexual culture, such as public sex and non-intimacy. They point out the multiple limitations in thinking of sexuality as a form of intimacy and subjectivity. (Berlant and Warner 208) Additionally, they criticize Foucault’s discussion of sexuality for identifying it as a “property of subjectivity rather than a publicly accessible culture” (Berlant and Warner 200). Sexuality, to them, involves every day social life; especially in queer theory, (see: Emma Doerksen’s entry on [[Queer]]|[[Queerness]) they state that it is an “inescapable category of analysis, agitation, and refunctioning”. (Berlant and Warner 205) While Berlant and Warner reject Foucault’s ‘limited’ explanation of sexuality on the issue of heteronormativity, they affirm his focus on discourse and go one step further, stating that its modern form is a “fundamental human capacity”. (Berlant and Warner 199) Yet this notion of sexuality being a neverending area of agitation, or resistance, also brings to mind Foucault’s concluding call to resist the mechanisms of control in the deployment of sexuality. Perhaps the past conceptions of sexuality have not differed so much in comparison to the contemporary moment.

In Leo Bersani’s “Is the Rectum a Grave?”, he differentiates between sexuality and the ways to “have sex” (Bersani 206). He notes that the realities of the AIDS epidemic “legitimated” a fantasy of female sexuality—bottoming—as intrinsically diseased, and that public discourse viewed promiscuity as a sign of infection (Bersani 211). The homosexuals were coming for the heterosexual male population, eager to eradicate them even though the epidemic was killing drastically more homosexual men. (Bersani 221) Thus, to know a promiscuous homosexual was to know their murderous intent; to know their mind. Here, Davidson’s angle of sexuality rings true.

Furthermore, Bersani sarcastically comments how mainstream media, also public discourse, covered the AIDS crisis from the heterosexual perspective and heterosexual anxieties: “we can… count on [the liberal press] to give front page coverage [of] a presumably straight health worker testing positive for the HIV virus…TV treats us to nauseating processions of yuppie women announcing to the world that they will no longer put out for their yuppie boyfriends unless these boyfriends agree to use a condom.” (Bersani 202). The public discourse around sexuality and the fatal dangers of sexual perversion highlight the futurity of 19th century heteronormative anxieties on sexuality and sexual perversions; only now, the mystery of sexuality has already been solved. Instead, the kind of person, the homosexual ‘carrier’ and bringer of the virus is to be set as the deviant to the heterosexual man. Science categorized sexual perversions into different kinds of people; society “othered” them with this scientific backing. Finally, Bersani is interested in analyzing sexuality from a psychoanalytic lens, and though this essay will avoid discussing sexuality psychoanalytically, I find his discussion of Freud interesting in that he posits the self as always wanting to be on top. Thus, sexuality is condemned to a struggle for power. (Bersani 218) However, like Foucault’s account, sexuality is inherently intertwined with power and control. The challenge, according to Foucault, is to resist these mechanisms of control and take back power.

## Conclusion
To return to my initial question, is there a concrete definition of sexuality? This entry attempts to provide an answer. Foucault’s history of sexuality traces its emergence as something deployed through the power structures involved in the history of discourse. He focuses on the subjective telling of one’s truth and sex. Davidson, on the other hand, focuses on how sexuality emerged when the 19th century became obsessed with perversion. One commonality between both accounts is the emphasis on discourse having a strong impact on the concept of sexuality. Upon comparison to contemporary texts by Berlant & Warner and Bersani, certain concepts of sexuality resurface from Foucault and Davidson’s accounts. While this essay may not have provided a concrete definition of sexuality, my hope in this essay is to outline some ways to understand it. 

Works Cited:

Foucault, Michel. _The History of Sexuality_. New York: Vintage, 1980. Print.

Davidson, Arnold. _The Emergence of Sexuality_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001. Print.

Berlant, Lauren and Warner, Steve. "Sex in Public." _Publics and Counterpublics_. 1958.

Bersani, Leo. "Is the Rectum a Grave?" _October_. 1987. Print.
