## Public Transit, Race, and Surveillance by cheerybaby
# Sammy Yatim 
On July 27, 2013, just before midnight, an 18 year old Syrian named Sammy Adib Yatim boarded the 505 Dundas streetcar around Bellwoods Avenue. Armed with a switchblade and acting erratically, Sammy charged at a woman on the streetcar. Sammy uttered threats, swiped a woman with a knife, and exposed himself. Police were called in to respond. Ordered by Police Constable James Forcillo to cease his forward motion, Yatim took severals steps towards the officer. Forcillo fired five shots, killing Yatim. Sammy was shot a total of 9 times and then tasered. The incident was captured by Toronto Transit Commission in its entirety by security cameras on board the streetcar, as well as cell phone footage taken by bystanders. The footage immediately made its way online through sites like Facebook, Youtube, and LiveLeak. Edited footage was circulated by local media. <sup>1</sup>

The circumstances surrounding Sammy’s shooting became a point of public debate. Sammy’s body had tested positive for ecstasy and trace amounts of cocaine. Rumors circulated that Yatim had suffered a mental break. Police treatment of Toronto’s Syrian community, as well as of the mentally-ill came under scrutiny. The term EDP, or ‘emotionally disturbed person’ made its way into public lexicon. The term is employed by the police to define any person who is acting erratic, being a public nuisance.<sup>2</sup> The use of the term was seen as sign of the lack of nuance police can display when interacting with the public. Constable Forcillo was eventually charged with attempted murder, and given a six year sentence, a complete anomaly in terms of prosecution. Forcillo was shown to have used excessive force when he made the decision to fire upon Yatim, another decision that ignited public debate. 

The incident and its surrounding discourse mirrors many incidents of police shooting and police brutality across North America. This piece will attempt to bring together the discourses around surveillance, police shootings, with an eye trained towards the ethics of publishing and reproduction of images and video of police violence. I will also pay special attention to the securitization of public spaces especially public transit, and the ways in which those spaces fall under the view of surveillance tools, either by state or non state actors. Simone Brown’s Dark Matters as well as Deleuze’s Postscript on the Societies of Control will be useful in showing the ways in which capturing and broadcasting footage produces and remaps identities and affects the public consciousness. Brown historicizes the technologies and apparatus of surveillance, proving them to be part and parcel of the technologies of race. Each new viral surveillance video is a glimpse into our social and technological contemporary. We have the tools and the network not to just capture every new moment, but to sit and have a focused reflection of the images contained. That reflection could be undertaken alone or with an anonymous online crowd. A new para-cinematic (an exploitative pulp film culture) around surveillance footage is formed. I will also look at judicial and legislative responses to the privacy challenges posed by surveillance and the ways in which surveillance images have circulated in the Western world.
# Oscar Grant
On the morning of January 1st, 2009, Oakland Transit BART officers stopped 22 year old Oscar Grant and a group of his friends on their way home from a New Years party. Police forced them face down onto the ground and handcuffed them. Following an indeterminate struggle, Grant was shot and killed by BART officer Johannes Mehserle. The incident was captured by bystanders, circulated heavily through Twitter and WorldStarHipHop and overnight, activists organized, demanding action. Officer Mehserle was charged with Grant’s accidental death. A feature film, *Fruitvale Station* dramatizing the events was produced to critical acclaim.

Is it ethical to replay the images of violence against racialized bodies? Is it productive? Activists have made the argument that it raises awareness of the violence people of colour face from authority figures. Detractors say that the reproduction of images of (in a North American context, often black) victims desensitizes us and channels us into forming narrow conceptions of the lives of racialized peoples. The argument being that, if there is a lack of positive representation then people will come to assume that life for non-whites is simply a litany of tragedies with no depth or substance.<sup>3</sup> There is an identification with the camera, we become scopophilic, or voyeurs. We cultivate a culture around the images, but divorce the violence captured from the communities that are affected. We are in effect desensitized. Brown offers up a way to understand historically the way in which surveillance seems to be indivisible from race, esp blackness, writing *"while racial segregation was aimed at black people as a group or class and sought to erase individuality by making black people seemingly interchangeable, surveillance 'highlights individuality by making the individual hypervisible and on display'" (57). The resulting synthesis of invisibility/hyper visibility is a kind of existential crises. For a more grounded and comprehensive contextualization of race as it pertains to the operations of the state, review [Race](https://github.com/kredati/control-encyclopedia/wiki/Race)
We can certainly say that the images captured galvanized a certain support. We can imagine that in a world where Oscar Grant’s murder was never captured on film as one where his death is merely a news headline, tucked away, and gradually forgotten. Would there have been a trial of Officers Mehserle or Forcillo if their actions were invisible? It is important to say that although they had trials, at every step their culpability was alleviated, their actions rendered passive. They showed up, discharged their weapon, the death as a consequence was unfortunate and ultimately avoidable. Officer Mehserle served 11 months in prison before being paroled. Forcillo was sentenced to six years, but appeals are ongoing.  The fact that they are tried and sentenced at all is a major anomaly, and we can thank the video footage for that. But there are numerous cases where incidents captured on cameras, surveillance, police body cam, or by public bystanders result in no charges whatsoever. How do we absorb those into a narrative of liberal progress? Is the demand for a type of justice based in harsher judicial sentencing misguided? The reformist position is less enviable. The adoption of police body cams further advances the expansion of a surveillance culture. Their emerging popularity has coincided with a culture of circulation. Even mandated body cams can be and are circumvented. Body cams are left off, turned away. The arithmetic is a cruel one. There is a much less severe punishment for having your bodycam off than for being spotted killing someone.
# Who Watches, Who Is Watched
Websites like LiveLeak and WorldStar have dedicated categories for videos of that type. There are an uncountable number of Facebook and Youtube pages dedicated to police footage. Published and liked on Facebook, they become part of an algorithmic identity, a secondary digital identity that radiates outside of the Facebook ecosystem and shadows your online experience. The pages are not politically neutral. They follow a number of other websites that broadcast police video in a way to celebrate, or to mythologize the police officer. There is a hero-worship rhetoric: look at this brave cop, here are the terrifying dangers they face; people on drugs, emotionally disturbed individuals, with guns and knives, not following orders. Entire supercuts of pro-police videos exist, they sit alongside other videos meant to make the violent actions of state agents look normative: look at the Marine harass the woman in the hijab, or look at the excitement of the family and their poodle when their deployed father returns home unexpectedly. When videos of violent police interactions circulate, the comments read, and they are numerous: if the person had simply obeyed the officer or the soldier, then this would have been avoided.  The ideal obedient subject is formed. There is the family unit, the right religion, the home owning middle class. These people do not use drugs and are not emotionally disturbed. Their videos, broadcasted and reproduced, are celebrated and adored. They are provided pathos, they are made human in the eyes of the camera. Their motives and intentions are never the subject of heated public debate. 
Once these images are in circulation, it cannot be dictated what vessels in which they circulate. We cannot dictate whether people cheer or flinch, and it is the former group that increasingly finds airtime on nightly news and support from the judicial system. Irate commenters openly display severe racist invective. The fervor around footage is like the Zapruder film of the Kennedy assassination, every frame endlessly analyzed and debated, meaning searched for in blurry gestures and glances. The search for the incontrovertible proof, the affirmation of my bias. We insert ourselves in a melodrama. By watching and by circulating these videos, we are no longer passive viewers, we construct ourselves as active participants. But really, we are always active participants, regardless of our involvement in circulation. We are always constantly under surveillance to some degree. Sharing and watching offer a degree of agency, but always under the umbrella of further surveillance. 
# TTC
After the Yatim shooting, the TTC announced a number of seemingly unrelated changes, including to the rider fee structure. Prices were raised, and the popular Metropass program was to be shuttered. Metropasses are a monthly pass that allow for unhindered movement across all TTC platforms: bus, streetcar, subway etc. The Metropass is a simple card, with no identifying marks or technical sophistication. You simply swipe the card at the turnstile or show it to the operator, and you are off. In its place, the TTC introduced the Presto card. The Presto card is a ‘smart’ card. It is a card that carries a monetary balance, a log of your movements, and your identity. You load the card with funds and spend the funds at the appropriately marked Presto gates. 

Recently, I was stopped by TTC Transit Enforcement agents while on the streetcar to work. It was around 8:30am. I had run out of funds, and lacking an alternative, I made the unwise decision to risk stealing a ride. Transit agents can rarely be found on the line I take, eastbound on College street, through Little Italy, past the University of Toronto, past Bay Street (the financial district). On that day, I was unlucky. Two transit agents boarded at Spadina Avenue and College Street (adjacent to the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health), and asked for my card. Rather than suffer than embarrassment of having them discover I had not paid, I simply told them that I had no funds. They looked at each other grimly, and scanned my card anyway. The device that scans the card gave them a history of my transit usage, limited to where I had got on and when. They could see that the day before, I had taken the same line at the same time, and had also taken the reverse line in the evening. They asked me to explain, and I told them I had gone to work and come home. This seemed agreeable to them. Although they are mandated to ticket me in this situation, as they had done to others on the streetcar, they chose to let me off with a warning. 

I was embarrassed but curious. What else could they discern from my card that they had not chosen to share with me? Why had they chosen to issue a warning to me and no one else? I work in an office. I was wearing a button-up shirt and slacks. I am a typical white male commuter in the morning rush hour. If I had looked and dressed something more like Sammy Yatim, would I have been ticketed? If I was showing signs of being ‘emotionally disturbed’, would I have been ticketed? The disparity in treatment was stark, but the message is clear: some people belong in certain places at certain times, others do not. 

The latent possibilities embedded in the Presto imparted on me a sense of confoundment. This was presented as the future of transit in our city, a conflation of digital information gathering with efficiency and modernization. The TTC spent millions converting subway station turnstiles into Presto gates. They are noted for their flimsy, automatic doors, like saloon doors. They are easily broken. The gates at Ossington station have been kicked open, and with no station attendant, people pass through unmediated. Reflecting on a passage from Postscript on the Societies of Control, where Deleuze talks about movement through the society of control being mediated by security cards *“Felix Guattari has imagined a city where one would be able to leave one's apartment, one's street, one's neighborhood, thanks to one's (dividual) electronic card that raises a given barrier; but the card could just as easily be rejected on a given day or between certain hours; what counts is not the barrier but the computer that tracks each person's position--licit or illicit--and effects a universal modulation.”*<sup>4</sup> Passing safely through security gates required permission. After the G20 Conference in the city and the hasty securitization efforts that resulted in violence and property damage, how could future gatherings be policed? Major disruptions such as the 2011 Manchester riots in England, or the 2013 Boston Marathon bombings saw the use of new powers of surveillance and control. During the Manchester riots, looters were identified with the help of average citizens. People were encouraged to submit photos to the police online. *“From the start the operation was a multimedia and multiplatform one, deployed through high visibility strategies within the material fabric of the city centre, online through the creation of a police website, a Flicker account with a photo gallery and a Facebook account…  Vans with large posters displaying the images of suspects (rapidly updated with new faces) were being driven across the city centre. Others were stationed in strategic points, at transport hubs or along shopping streets. Large electronic displays were set up on existing and ad-hoc screens, positioned in squares, outside train stations and in a large multiplex cinema and bars complex”*<sup>5</sup>. License plate readers were used to track the movements of people who had been convicted of crimes, to stop them from reaching the city. Similarly, during the Boston Marathon bombing, movement in and out of the city was restricted, and city services such as public transit were suspended. Hypothetically, movement of peoples could be managed with the Presto card in way that could not be achieved previously. People could be categorized as acceptable or unacceptable without impeding the regular function of transit. Choosing to circumvent that would be opening yourself up to being stopped or prosecuted. 
# Our Options and Questions
How do we become invisible? How do we render others invisible? Options look increasingly difficult. Can we conceive of internets made for us, rather than of circulations of industry and capital? The private ‘dark web’ is mostly filled with nonsense, but is increasingly an arena for trading drugs and illegal pornography. Can this space be claimed for activists? Is that productive? How have activists countered surveillance methods effectively? Recent leaked documents from Wikileaks showed the ease of which the CIA was able to maneuver around the encryption embedded in apps like Signal and Tor. By logging keystrokes, the CIA was able gather messages before they were passed through the algorithm.<sup>6</sup> 
It is safe to assume that nothing we input into phones is safe from government entities. What was once thought of as conspiracy paranoia becomes the banal reality of existing. It could be said that much of what was dismissed as paranoia was simply a reflex of our attending privileges. Of course well to do white folks believed that they were not being surveilled, or that authority figures were trustworthy, their communities were never subjected to COINTELPRO FBI surveillance. Their communities are not purposely zoned in proximity with industrial waste run off. 

Following the Edward Snowden NSA revelations, the surveillance community became obsessed with the idea of ‘metadata.’ Metadata was not the raw information, the full sweeping surveillance that one might expect, but the aggregation of minor data points into a narrative. Metadata is like the information stored in a Presto card, not damning in and of itself, but allowing for the weaving of narratives. Collated with other reference points, other people, businesses etc, metadata could serve to lead to damning prosecutions. If you could be shown to have lived, purchased or travelled coincidentally with a suspicious person, than that would be enough to justify full sweeping surveillance. 

Recently, dossiers shared by Wikileaks served to show that after Snowden, the CIA and NSA had only become more bold in capturing information. The sensational claim has been made that the CIA had identified backdoors in a diverse array of ‘smart’ technologies, without the knowledge of the companies that produced the devices. They had identified security flaws in the devices and made use of hacking tools to exploit them in order to record conversations. Furthermore, those tools were frequently left exposed, found for sale on the dark web. Conceivably, a private citizen could purchase sophisticated hacking tools anonymously over the internet. Those same tools enable the user to cover their tracks, or leave tracks intended to look like other state actors, North Korea, Russia etc.<sup>7</sup> The longer the tendrils of the tools created to surveil and disrupt, the more they inject their way into our ordinary lives. By creating a new gate, requiring new passes, the flow of bodies and capitals can be modulated, made more manageable. 

<sup>1</sup> https://www.thestar.com/news/crime/2013/07/28/man_dies_in_street_showdown_with_police.html

<sup>2</sup> http://www.torontopolice.on.ca/community/tps_response_to_edp.pdf

<sup>3</sup> http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/opinion/commentary/ct-texas-cop-black-girl-pool-party-mckinney-20150610-story.html

<sup>4</sup> https://genius.com/Gilles-deleuze-postscript-on-the-societies-of-control-annotated

<sup>5</sup>http://journals2.scholarsportal.info.myaccess.library.utoronto.ca/pdf/14777487/v12i0001/3_eppussaotm2r.xml

<sup>6</sup>http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2017/03/08/wikileaks_says_the_cia_can_bypass_signal_what_does_that_mean.html

<sup>7</sup> http://www.wired.co.uk/article/cia-files-wikileaks-vault-7