The word “user” is most commonly employed within the context of technology; it is someone who uses a computer product, machine, or service. Unlike the term “drug user,” technology users do not represent a specific type of person nor do they seem to pose a social problem that requires our attention. A user can theoretically be anyone. Because of this, most people have integrated the word into their vocabularies without much thought. “User” has become a noun so obvious, like “person,” that few think about what it means. This entry aims to show why the term merits our consideration by outlining its origins and present-day implications.

The entry begins in the 1960s when a user was first conceptualized and integrated into technical terminology. This is followed by a honeymoon period where usership evokes personal liberation and control over powerful computer systems. Later, writers like Gilles Deleuze, Jonathan Sterne, and Alexander Galloway suggest that users are not actually the ones controlling systems but are in fact subjects of control. Wendy Chun and Tung-Hui Hu further our understanding of users by explaining how they are produced by interfaces, OSs, and economic liberalism. This entry will also explore why users are produced. In particular how they are produced to better control populations. Finally, we will also identify the difference between a user and the person behind them, since users are often thought of to be reflections of people.
To guide our understanding of the term, Kris Cohen provides a summary that is more informative than the dictionary definition given in the opening paragraph. Cohen writes: “‘users’ refer both to actual people [...] and to a kind of abstraction or methodological fiction [...], they (and I mean both the notion and the actual people it abstracts) can be used diversely, pressed easily into service as research methods, marketing tools, advertising slogans”. As this definition indicates, the world around users is more complex than expected.

## I - Origins: Users as controllers
The modern conception of a user was born in the 1960s when more people gained access to computers. This was made possible by the invention of time-sharing, a process that allows the cost of a computer to be shared by dividing its time between multiple users. The size of computers also shrinks from huge blocks of hardware to smaller, more accessible machines. Instead of simply calling the growing number of people who use computers “people who use computers,” we began calling them “users”. As suggested by the verb it is derived from, a user is meant to use the system for their needs. The user is the source of the action and the computer is an object meant for manipulation.

One of the earliest instances where the word was employed was in Douglas Engelbart’s “Mother of all Demos”. This was the seminal demonstration he made in 1968 that introduced many of the tools we use today including the mouse and hypertext. Engelbart demonstrates functions that a user can execute with a personal computer. He specifically chooses ones that are practical and meant to make the user’s daily life more efficient. He also notes that his research team is constantly thinking of new user features that make human interaction with computers more fluid. Essentially his team was interested in user-friendliness, which is the same concern shared by many tech developers today.

By the 1980s personal computers were in many homes and the young population of “western” countries had become familiar with usership. One development which brought the term “user” into mainstream use was the birth of video game culture. In arcade games people could explore virtual worlds by becoming users. Although there was limited choice (in 1985 you could only choose between Mario or Luigi), these games marked the beginning of a player’s ability to choose who and what they looked like. The user-program relationship is explored in the cult film Tron about a man who gets beamed into a computer and uses programs to help him escape. Programs speak fondly of users as if they are gods. In the dialogue below, a user named Flynn humbly dismisses this, but ultimately he proves that users are in control by manipulating gamespace and successfully breaking out of the computer. 

  				                TRON
				But -- if you're a User -- then everything 
                                you've done has been part of a plan …
          	
                                [...] 
	        
		 			        FLYNN
				Look, you guys know how it is. You just
				keep doin' what it looks like you're
				supposed to, even if it seems crazy, and
				you hope to hell your User knows what's
				goin' on.

		 				TRON
				Well -- that's how it is for programs,yes, 
                                but --
	
		 	                        FLYNN
	                        I hate to disappoint you, pal, most-the
	                        time, that's how it is for Users, too.

Therefore from the 1960s-1980s, users are thought of as those who can control, input, and manipulate technology for their use.

## II - Users as controlled
Some theorists reject the early conception of usership and suggest a different power relation between users and the world they live in. In particular, users might actually be the subjects of control rather than the resourceful gods of _Tron_. 
  
Gilles Deleuze’s “Postscript on the Societies of Control” helps foreground this new understanding of a user’s place in society. He begins by engaging with Michel Foucault’s concept of disciplinary societies where individuals are characterized by a number that indicates their position within a population. Deleuze believes this model has been replaced by a new system where population management is achieved through control rather than discipline. He says that in societies of control, “what is important is no longer either a signature or a number, but a code: the code is a _password_ [...]. The numerical language of control is made of codes that mark access to information, or reject it”. Accordingly, he says this new type of society works well with computers. Every computer user is familiar with having to input a username and password before entering a site. Many users are also familiar with the frustration of being locked out of a website because they lack the required credentials. Written in 1990, “Postscript on the Societies of Control” also mentions Félix Guattari’s imagined city where people have electronic cards that provide or deny access to certain spaces. This has become a reality through common use of id cards and key fobs in apartment buildings, businesses, and state institutions. Therefore it is not only actions in the digital world but also the physical world that are limited by a person’s user information.    

Following off this model of control is the question posed by Jonathan Sterne in his article “What if Interactivity is the New Passivity”. His central claim is that user participation might be “the central hinges through which power works”. People tend to think using computers is more respectful than watching television, since computers involve participation instead of passive absorption. Sterne questions this assumption by pointing out how contemporary media demands user participation in order to measure audiences. The data is extracted from us and then monetized against our favour. The following two sections will further explore how users are willing actors of their own manipulation.

## III - How are users produced? (I)
###       Operating systems and interfaces
Digital media theorist Wendy Chun suggests that users are produced by interfaces and operating systems. In her book _Programmed Visions: Software and Memory_, she dismisses the idea that users enjoy mastery of computer systems (the perception outlined in section A). She says “the emergence of user-friendly interfaces as a form of ‘computer liberation’ seems dubious at best and obfuscatory at worst”. Instead she says that graphical user interfaces (GUIs) and operating systems (OSs) interpellate you à la Althusser by offering a name or image to identify with. Far from being in control, users are offered choices that limit what they can see and do within the system. Interfaces also give users a false sense of control and ownership by using terms like “My Documents”. This works alongside things like HTML and IP addresses that also conceal complicated code and uphold the illusion that users are in control of the interface. All the while users perpetuate their control by maintaining the system. Catherine Malabou notes that “personnel,” or what we call users, are self-organized and self controlling. They constantly input data into the system because they live in “a permanent anxiety about being disconnected, rejected, abandoned”. Users are thus the audience and the actors in this neoliberal edition of control society.

Chun also alludes to the idea of users being the source and victim of society in her article with Sarah Friedland titled “Habits of Leaking”. The article addresses the 21st century trend of uploading and circulating nude photos. They point out how narratives identify the uploader as simultaneously the source and victim of scandals. Leaked photos are seen as “user-induced accidents,” and media often blames the uploader regardless of whether they meant for the content to be circulated. Users are thus created by OSs and interfaces and induced to maintain systems that may harm them. 

## IV - How are users produced? (II)
###       Economic liberalisation 
Tung-Hui Hu presents another theory which states that users are produced by economic liberalism and controlled by virtualization. In _The Prehistory of the Cloud_, he writes that users are not just produced by software (what Chun explores), but by an economic system. First he points out that what feels like a direct relationship between users and websites is tirelessly maintained by Third World operators. There are also system monitors, and although these were mostly replaced after complaints of looking too much like government bureaucracy, the system of “garbage collection” we have today is simply a more discreet version of the same selective curation. He elaborates on mechanisms of curation and what it means to be a user in the chapter “Time Sharing and Virtualization”:

>Each time we mute an irrelevant post, dismiss an ad, or mark an e-mail “spam,” we exclude what is wasteful from our >digital environment — and, in the process, also contribute to the statistical filters that decide whether a message is a >waste of our time. [...] The net result is that we have become willing partners with the algorithms that channel our >online experience. Interpellated as “users,” we identify with use and use value, and therefore mend and build the gates >that keep us within a zone of productivity online. It is, in a twist of Stewart Brand’s complaint about the “passive >consumerism” of non-interactive computing, a kind of active consumerism.

This passage echoes Sterne and Chun who also mention how users have become active participants in the system that controls them. As Hu outlines in this passage, users are in control in the sense that they are the curators of their online experience, but curation is the very mechanism that turns them into better economic subjects. They provide algorithms with streams of data to be utilized for sorting and monitoring their consumer identities. Hu places this discourse (of the “user” as an active participant) within the neoliberal ideology of economic efficiency.
In the section of his book titled “War as Big Data,” Hu extends his discussion of user participation to the field of war. The digital age gives anyone equipped with a computer the ability to participate in the state’s project of security. This is no doubt empowering. However the problem is that “user engagement with security has disturbing consequences: when users are invited to perform or play at the sovereign’s role as a ‘decider’ (and ultimately the sovereign’s right to kill), security and participation fuse into what I term the _sovereignty of data_”. Users thus become complicit in state violence and are pawns in an age that Hu believes is a regression to the sovereign model of political power.

Hu and Chun thus have different approaches to studying usership but they not incompatible. Instead we can perhaps see them as simultaneous; users are produced by OSs and interfaces and then controlled by continuous virtualization, all in the spirit of economic liberalism.

## V - Today: Why are users produced?
Throughout our discussion of what a user is and how they are produced, this entry has not explicitly stated _why_ users are produced. Media theorist and digital art historian Kris Cohen’s writing guides us through this question. Building off the groundwork laid by Michel Foucault, Cohen says users are produced to better control populations (for more, see entry “Population”). This section will first summarize his piece “Who We Talk About When We Talk About Users” before engaging with his ideas on population. 

“Who We Talk About When We Talk About Users” seems to have been written with the understanding that, like this entry shows, many don’t know what a user is and there have been few comprehensive efforts to define it. The majority of his piece deals with users in the context of product design. In this context, users are seen as consumers only to be “viewed through the lense of their consumer habits”. The following is Cohen’s definition of user:
“Users” refer both to actual people (_the ones we interviewed_) and to a kind of abstraction or methodological fiction (_inspired by our users_), they (and I mean both the notion and the actual people it abstracts) can be used diversely, pressed easily into service as research methods, marketing tools, advertising slogans.   
As he alludes to here, products are not made for users, but users are put in the service of products. Granted, users are studied in order to understand what products to create. In this way they are a creative tool. But Cohen notes that users are also economic and political tools since they can be used retroactively to justify an already existing product (i.e. when a designer says “our users asked for it”). His article also mentions that importantly, not everyone can be a user. Products are usually made with a specific user in mind, Cohen uses the example of “American teenage boys, aged 18-21, whose parents make between $30K and $60K/year”. Certain populations, in particular racial, gender, or sexual minorities are rarely subjects of study, and are thus excluded from enjoying the product. These products can be anything from everyday objects to useful computer programs. 

This discussion foregrounds the deeper analysis Cohen makes in his book _Never Alone, Except Now_. In the chapter “Search Engine Subjectivities,” he says users constantly input data into search engines and are returned results that feel personalized. This occurs through cybernetic systems that “feed lives into algorithms to produce populations and thus exert forms of soft and hard control over those populations”. Users, more specifically their continuously updated stream of user data, has thus replaced statistics as the tool through which we are produced as populations and controlled. The important change in the Foucauldian conception of individuals and populations is that Cohen says there is no longer any difference between the two. Instead, “personhood and population begin to generate each other and so become less and less distinguishable”. Today, there is no need for an individualizing technology like sexuality to act as the articulation that transforms us into subjects; we voluntarily upload ourselves directly into the system. 

## VI - In the end, what is the difference between a User and a Person?
Finally, this entry asks the question of whether a user is a person. After all, we often blur the lines between user and person by seeing the former as simply the virtual representation of the latter. Contemporary media theory suggests that user statistics have actually overtaken the person in terms of importance. In _Protocol_, Alexander Galloway suggests that a user’s statistics are more important than the physical person’s real identity: 
Demographics and user statistics are more important than real names and real identities. On the Internet there is no reason to know the name of a particular user, only to know what the user likes, where they shop, where they live, and so on. The clustering of descriptive information around a specific user becomes sufficient to explain the identity of that user.

He continues this passage by engaging with Foucault’s concept of “biopower,” the type of power that affects material objects at the informational level rather than at the level of individual content. Today a person is relevant as a source of information rather than as source whose happiness should be a subject of concern. User data has taken precedence over the person it originated from. Cohen mentions that textual representations of people are often all we get to know about them. This mirror’s philosopher Jean Baudrillard’s idea of the simulation taking precedence to the referent. Therefore not only does our user information precede our physical person, nobody even cares whether our “person” follows at all. 

******Works Cited******

Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. _Programmed Visions: Software and Memory_. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2011.   
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong, and Sarah Friedland. “Habits of Leaking: Of Sluts and Network Cards.” _differences: A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies_, vol. 26, no. 2, 2015, pp. 1-28.    
Cohen, Kris. _Never Alone, Except for Now._ 2017.    
Cohen, Kris. “Who We Talk About When We Talk About Users.” _EPIC_, 2005. pp.9-30   
Deleuze, Gilles. “Postscript on the Societies of Control.” MIT Press, 1992.   
Engelbart, Douglas. “The Mother of All Demos.” _YouTube_. 9 Dec. 1968.    
Galloway, Alexander R. _Protocol: How Control Exists After Decentralization_. The MIT Press, 2004.   
Hu, Tung-Hui. _A Prehistory of the Cloud_. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 2015.   
Lisberger, Steven. _TRON_. 1982. Netflix.ca   
Sterne, Jonathan. “What if Interactivity is the New Passivity?” _Flow Journal_. 9 Apr. 2012.   
